---
title: Commentary assignment for HEL (ME and EModE)
tags:
- assignments
- translation
- critical commentary
- writing
- GenAI
- Middle English
- EModE Early Modern English
- MED
- OED
- language
- rubric
- ENGL 300
---

Write a critical commentary on an assigned passage of early English.

# General instructions {#general-instructions-trans-comm}

Each critical commentary has the following parts:

1. A machine-generated translation of the assigned passage into Present Day English prose
1. A commentary on the original passage and the machine translation of it
1. Bibliographic details for all sources

Clearly label all parts.
Print a copy, observing the [general instructions for written assignments](#policies-on-written-work).
Printed and electronic copies are due at the beginning of class on the dates indicated on the [Course Schedule](#schedule).

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-trans-comm}

## The original passage {.unnumbered}

Passages will be assigned within Sakai: see the Assignments tab.
Your passage should be a coherent grammatical unit.
Do not begin or end within a clause; do not include a subordinate clause without also including the main clause on which it depends.
If you keyboard the passage, check the result, letter-by-letter, to correct typographic errors.


## The machine-generated translation {.unnumbered}

Prompt a generative artificial intelligence application to translate the passage into Present Day English prose.
[Copilot](https://copilot.microsoft.com/) is available to Loyola students free of charge: select the option 'sign in through your institution', then use your Loyola email address.
Quote the AI's translation; provide a full correct citation in the Works Cited section.
(See [Citations and Bibliography], below.)

## The commentary {.unnumbered}

Write a commentary on the original passage and the machine translation of it.
Your commentary should address the following topics:

- Specific transformations made in the machine-generated translation.
  Identify and discuss representative changes in lexicon, idiom, sentence grammar, spelling, and punctuation.
- The accuracy of the machine-generated translation.
  Discuss particular details of translation.
  If you suspect the machine has erred, give reasons for your doubts.
- The lexicon.
  Identify the sources of the vocabulary of the original passage and the translation.
  How much of the vocabulary derives from Old English? How much from other languages (especially French, Old Norse, and Latin)?
  At the time of writing, which words in the original passage were the newest, i.e., most recently borrowed by or formed within English?
- Representative linguistic features.
  Identify and discuss linguistic features of the original passage which are characteristic of the period in which it was written.
  A model for this is the "Linguistic analysis" supplied by Horobin and Smith in *An Introduction to Middle English*, pp. 10--13.
 
Write about the details that promise the best return on the attention you invest in them, but be sure to address each of the topics above.
Support your discussion with precise, accurate references to course readings and historical dictionaries.
For Middle English, consult the *Middle English Dictionary*: see the list of [On-line Reference Works](#on-line-reference-works).
This commentary should be about 750 words in length.

## Citations and bibliography {.unnumbered}

Supply full, accurate bibliographical details in MLA or Chicago format for all sources (including the edition of the original text).
For guidance on citing the output of generative artificial intelligence applications, see MLA's guide ["How do I cite generative AI in MLA style?"](https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/)
or the Chicago Manual of Style's Q&A on [citing content developed or generated by artificial intelligence](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/qanda/data/faq/topics/Documentation/faq0422.html).
For guidance in citing the *Oxford English Dictionary* and *Middle English Dictionary* see [How to cite the OED and MED](#how-to-cite-the-oed-and-med).

# Rubric {#rubric-trans-comm}

Successful critical commentaries have the following characteristics:

- *Quotations* are accurate
- *Terminology* is appropriate to the task and handled effectively
- *Analysis* is accurate, perceptive, inquisitive, well organized, responds fully to the prompt, and makes effective use of course readings and historical dictionaries
- *Your prose* is clear and grammatically correct
- *Citations and bibliography* are complete, accurate, and correctly formatted

Points are allocated as follows (20 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
grammar and style | 4
analysis | 10
organization | 3
citations and bibl. | 3

Incorrect or missing bibliographic details will result in further point deductions.
Assignments with falsified sources receive zero credit and may be reported as plagiarism.
The policy on [Academic Integrity](#academic-integrity) applies.
