---
title: Research presentation in Middle English poetry
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- presentation
- ENGL 323
- Middle English
- rubric
---

# General instructions {#general-instructions-presentations}

Students will research a topic relevant to this class and report their findings in a short class presentation.
This may be a group effort if you wish.

The first step is to sign up for a presentation date and, optionally, form a group.
You will do this in the second and third weeks of class.
You may claim a topic at this time or leave your topic undecided while you explore options.

Select a topic from the list in the next section, below, or develop your own.
Clear your topic with me, so that we avoid duplicate presentations.
Once I have approved your topic, begin research.

Aim to speak for between five and ten minutes, supported by slides.
Each presentation is followed by open discussion.

The following sections provide more detailed instructions for individual components of this assignment.

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-presentations}

## Presentation topics {.unnumbered}

Here are suitable topics or starting-points for presentations in this class:

\begin{multicols}{2}
\begin{itemize}
\tightlist

\item the \emph{Aeneid} in the Middle Ages
\item agriculture and food production
\item alliterative verse
\item allegory and allegoresis
\item Anne of Bohemia
\item Arthurian literature
\item Bible in Middle English
\item Black Plague
\item Boethius and his \emph{Consolation of Philosophy}
\item books and book-making
\item Books of Hours
\item Canterbury
\item \emph{The Canterbury Tales} (select one)
\item castles
\item cathedrals
\item Caxton, William
\item Chaucer, Philippa (de Roet)
\item Christine de Pizan
\item clergy
\item \emph{Cleanness} (Middle English poem)
\item courts and courtliness
\item demographics
\item dreams and dream theory
\item fabliau
\item Fortune
\item French in England
\item friars
\item \emph{gentilesse}
\item Global Chaucers
\item glossing
\item Gower, John
\item \emph{grammatica}
\item Guillaume de Machaut
\item Hundred Years War
\item hunting
\item Ireland and medieval Irish literature
\item John of Gaunt
\item Julian of Norwich
\item law and lawyers
\item libraries
\item literacy
\item liturgy
\item London
\item manuscripts of Middle English poetry (select one, e.g., Auchinleck, Ellesmere, Hengwrt, Vernon)
\item manuscript decoration and painting
\item Middle English drama
\item monasticism
\item multilingualism
\item Nature (the goddess)
\item nobility
\item Old Norse
\item \emph{Patience} (Middle English poem)
\item \emph{Pearl} (Middle English poem)
\item peasantry
\item the Peasants' Revolt of 1381
\item penitential literature
\item pilgrimage
\item Pynkhurst, Adam
\item Purgatory
\item race and theories of racial difference
\item reception of a Middle English poet by a later poet or writer
\item recipes (medicinal or alimentary)
\item relics
\item Richard II
\item \emph{The Romance of the Rose}
\item saints' lives
\item schools
\item Scotland and medieval Scottish literature
\item scribes
\item sermons
\item sex and sexuality
\item \emph{Somnium Scipionis}
\item Southwark
\item Tabard Inn
\item towns
\item travel literature
\item universities
\item Wales and medieval Welsh literature
\item wool production and trade
\item Worcestershire
\item Wyclif, John and Wycliffism

\end{itemize}
\end{multicols}

Whether you chose a topic from this list or design your own, clear your topic with me.
You can do this by visiting office hours, talking with me before or after class, or sending me an email.

Expect your topic to shift as you research it, but beware of scope creep.
A good topic is coherent and not over-large.
If your topic cannot be illustrated with appropriate concrete detail in the space of ten minutes, select a narrower subtopic.

## Research {.unnumbered}

Most topics listed in the previous section are covered by a short article in the Wiley *Chaucer Encyclopedia*.
That is a good place to begin research: though Chaucer-centric, articles in the Wiley *Chaucer Encyclopedia* are generally responsible to a wider world.
Most conclude with a list of recommended readings.
Follow that bibliographic trail.
You will also find useful reading recommendations in the Oxford Bibliographies.
For links to these and to the Wiley *Chaucer Encyclopedia* see [Other useful resources](#other-useful-resources), above.

A basic keyword search of [Loyola's library catalog](https://libraries.luc.edu/) or [JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/) or [Project MUSE](https://muse.jhu.edu/) will often produce useful leads, among others less useful or irrelevant.
If you have a question about the relevance of a resource, ask me.
To access e-books, databases, and other on-line library resources, use an on-campus internet connection, or follow instructions for [off-campus access to digital resources](https://libraries.luc.edu/offcampus), or select the option "Log in through your institution" and follow the instructions from there.
If you have a question about access to a particular resource, ask me or a [Library specialist](http://libraries.luc.edu/specialists).

Non-scholarly sources located by general web searches are not acceptable for this assignment:
sources must be printed books or digital on-line resources to which Loyola subscribes.
Exceptions to this policy require prior approval.
The purpose of this restriction is to give you experience in locating, retrieving, and using professional scholarly research on a topic you have identified.
Have a question? Ask me.

Three high-quality sources are probably sufficient for this assignment.

## Slides {.unnumbered}

Good presentations are well organized and have an appropriate mix of concrete, relevant detail (including quotations) and explanatory commentary and interpretation.
Put section titles, key points, factual detail, and quotations on slides; give explanation and interpretation in your own voice.

Most students create slides with Google Slides, Canva, or Microsoft PowerPoint.
Aim for clarity and accessibility:

- A clear font such as Times New Roman or Arial
- Unpatterned backgrounds
- Good contrast between lettering and background (black lettering on white background is perfectly fine)
- A font size large enough to read from any seat in our classroom

Don't overwhelm us with lots of text in small type: if your topic for a given slide outgrows the dimensions of the slide, divide it among two or more slides.
Images are welcome but do not distract us with irrelevant graphics: keep the focus on your topic.

Introduce your topic and show its connection to our course.
If you narrowed an unwieldy topic into one more manageable, 'zoom in' from the larger topic to your chosen subtopic.

List your sources on the penultimate slide of your presentation (these may be split across two or more slides if needed).
Citations should be formatted in MLA or Chicago style.

On the last slide, list two or three questions for discussion.

Before your presentation, post a link to your slides in the "Wiki" section of Sakai, where you signed up for your presentation date.
Configure your document to be *viewable* (not editable) by anyone with the link.

## Delivery {.unnumbered}

Aim to speak for between five and ten minutes.

Speaking from notes or note-cards is perfectly fine.
Unless you are reading a quote from a primary or secondary source, don't read directly from your slides.
But always read the quotations, or ask a volunteer to read them.

Every presentation is followed by a discussion period: here you take questions from your audience and facilitate a class discussion of the questions on your final slide.

# Rubric {#rubric-presentations}

Successful presentations have the following characteristics:

- The *topic* is relevant to this course, appropriately sized, well defined, and unique (not covered by a previous presentation)
- *Content* is accurate, informative, relevant, appropriately detailed, clearly explained, and well organized
- *Sources* are works of professional scholarship appropriate to the topic and correctly cited
- *Slides* are clear and accessible
- *Delivery* is fluent, well organized, paced appropriately to the content and your audience, and fitted to time limits (neither too long nor too short)
- *Discussion questions* are relevant to the topic and invite thoughtful engagement from peers

Points are allocated as follows (10 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
topic | 2
content | 3
sources | 2
slide design | 1
delivery | 1
Q&A | 1

A presentation that duplicates the topic of an earlier presentation in this course will receive additional point deductions.
