---
title: Exams in UCLR
tags:
- exams
- passage id
- UCLR 100
- core
- fall 2024
---

[antecedent]: https://www.oxfordreference.com/display/10.1093/acref/9780199658237.001.0001/acref-9780199658237-e-78

Exams are a mix of passage identification and multiple choice.

# Instructions for passage identification

For each passage, state the author of the passage and the title of the work from which the passage is excerpted.
Then write a short interpretative commentary.
Consider the following:

- What is the genre or form of the work?
- What is happening in the passage? What is the context of the passage within the work?
  If there is a pronoun in the passage, identify its [antecedent].
- How do specific details of language contribute to the meaning of the passage?
  Quote and briefly discuss two or three details of sound, rhythm, meter, word choice, syntax, word order, figurative language, or another device of composition.
- What themes or issues are raised by the passage and its context?
- How does the passage contribute to the meaning of the work as a whole?

Write about details that repay the investment of attention you give to them.

# Rubric for passage identification

Successful passage identification has the following characteristics:

- *Author*, *title*, *genre*, and *context* are identified correctly
- *Commentary* on the passage is accurate, precise, perceptive, and inquisitive
- *Writing* is clear and well organized

Points are allocated as follows (5 points per passage):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
author and title | 1
context and genre | 1
quality of commentary | 2
clarity and organization | 1
