---
title: Dictionary assignment for UCLR
tags:
- assignments
- UCLR 100
- fall 2024
- writing
- OED
- language
- rubric
- Melville, Herman
- Morrison, Toni
dates:
  era: ''
  year: '2024'
---

[entry]: https://www.oed.com/information/understanding-entries/oed-terminology/#entry
[meaning]: https://www.oed.com/information/understanding-entries/oed-terminology/#meaning
[advanced search option]: https://www.oed.com/information/using-the-oed/how-to-getting-started-guides/#advanced-search
[entry display and navigation]: https://www.oed.com/information/using-the-oed/how-to-getting-started-guides/#entry-display-and-navigation
[quick search]: https://www.oed.com/information/using-the-oed/how-to-getting-started-guides/#quick-search
[definition]: https://www.oed.com/information/understanding-entries/oed-terminology/#definition

# General instructions {#general-instructions-dictionary-report}

Create a report on a single instance of a word of your choice, selected from the text of either Herman Melville's "Bartleby, The Scrivener" or Toni Morrison's "Recitatif."
Your principal source will be the *Oxford English Dictionary*.
The whole report should be about 300 words in length.

Observe the [general instructions for written assignments](#policies-on-written-work).
Electronic and paper copies are due at the beginning of class on the date indicated on the [Course Schedule](#schedule).

The next sections provide background information, detailed instructions, and a rubric.

# Background information

As a historical dictionary, the *Oxford English Dictionary* (*OED*) aims to describe not prescribe, and it aims to record the whole vocabulary of the English language.
Editors of the *OED* explain their processes in an animated infographic, ["How words enter the OED"](https://www.oed.com/information/editorial-policy/how-words-enter-the-oed/how-words-enter-the-oed-infographic/), featuring the dictionary's new-ish entry for the acronym [*O.M.G.*](https://www.oed.com/dictionary/omg_int)
As the infographic shows, dictionary editors illustrate usage with quotations drawn from all kinds of written sources.

The [advanced search option] allows users to search the *OED* for illustrative quotations drawn from a particular source or a particular author.
Here are two examples:

- [Results of an advanced search of the *OED* for illustrative quotations drawn from Herman Melville's "Bartleby, The Scrivener"](https://www.oed.com/search/advanced/Quotations?quotDateFirstUse=all&page=1&sortOption=AZ&textTermText0=H.+Melville&textTermOpt0=QuotAuthor&textTermText1=Bartleby&textTermOpt1=QuotWork&textTermOp1=AND)
- [Results of an advanced search of the *OED* for illustrative quotations drawn from the works of Toni Morrison](https://www.oed.com/search/advanced/Quotations?quotAuthor=toni%2520morrison&textTermText0=T.%2520Morrison&textTermOpt0=QuotAuthor&quotDateFirstUse=all&page=1&sortOption=AZ)

Clicking on any item in the search results will allow you to view the quotation within the [entry] and [meaning] that it illustrates.
(This functionality requires that you be logged in.
If you are not logged in, you will be redirected to the "Factsheet" tab and be prompted to log in when you select any of the other tabs.
When prompted, select the option "Sign in through your institution.")

Study the results of the advanced searches, above, and the entries linked to them.
For a refresher on the information collected within *OED* entries, view the video on [Entry display and navigation].

Notice, under each block of quotations, a button labled "Cite".
Clicking on "Cite" opens a pop-up with suggested citations.
Next to the "Cite" button many entries have a link to the [Historical Thesaurus of the *OED*](https://www.oed.com/information/about-the-oed/historical-thesaurus-of-the-oed/).
Clicking on "Historical Thesaurus" opens a list of words used with like meaning at various points in the history of the English language.
For instance, opening the "Historical Thesaurus" module for ["scrivener, *n.*, meaning 1.a"](https://www.oed.com/dictionary/scrivener_n?tab=meaning_and_use&show-all-quotations=true#1016029231) displays a list of twenty other English words recorded with the meaning "professional writer" at some time in the past millennium.
These words are sorted chronologically, according to the date of their first recorded use with the meaning "professional writer."
The dates after each word indicate the period during which the word is recorded with this meaning.
From this information, we can infer that in 1853, when Melville wrote Bartleby, he had several options for expressing the meaning "professional writer": not only *scrivener* (in use with the meaning "professional writer" since 1218), but also *scriever*, *scribe*, *scrivan*, *penman*, *scrivano*, *scriptor*, *Khoja*, *quill man*, *conicopoly*, *quill-driver*, and *sirkar*.

Links allow us to explore each of these words within the *OED*, and gather information that might be relevant to Melville's usage.
For instance, we could examine the frequency data for each word, to determine whether it was more or less frequent than *scrivener* in 1853.
We could also study the definitions and quotations for each word, to determine whether their meanings fully overlap with *scrivener*, or differ from *scrivener* in either denotation or [connotation](https://www.oxfordreference.com/display/10.1093/acref/9780198715443.001.0001/acref-9780198715443-e-246).

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-oed-report}

Select either Melville's "Bartleby, The Scrivener" or Morrison's "Recitatif."
Next, from the work you have selected ("Bartleby" or "Recitatif"), select any word not already illustrated by the *OED* with a quotation from the work you have selected.

Entries in the *OED* are updated continuously.
As of August 24, 2024, the *OED* records quotations from Toni Morrison's novels, but none from "Recitatif."
So long as this remains true, you may select any word from "Recitatif."
If you have selected "Bartleby," avoid the words that figure in the advanced search for quotations from that work.
(See [Background Information].)

Once you have selected a word, supply the following:

## (1) A quotation {.unnumbered}

Select and format an illustrative quotation.

- Select a quotation from the work ("Bartleby" or "Recitatif"), featuring the word you have chosen. The quotation should usually be a full sentence but may be shorter if the sentence is very long or longer if the sentence is very short: take the *OED*'s illustrative quotations as models.

- Distinguish your word with **bold** type.

- Indicate the source of the quotation. Do this by placing the author's last name, the short title of the work, and the page number in parentheses after the quotation. For instance: (Melville, "Bartleby," p. 3). The page-number reference should be to the edition from which we read in this course.

- Put the formatted quotation and the citation at the top of your report. Label it "Quotation."

## (2) A definition and dictionary citation {.unnumbered}

Identify the *OED* [entry] and [meaning] that best fits the use of the word in the quotation you have selected.

- Perform a [quick search] of the *OED* and identify the [entry] that corresponds to your word.

- Once you have found the relevant entry, read through the meanings. Identify the meaning that best fits the use of the word in your quotation. Copy the [definition] and paste it into your report, under the quotation. Label this "Definition."

- Open the "Cite" window for the relevant meaning. Under "MLA9", select the option "Copy to clipboard." Paste this citation into your report. Label it "Dictionary citation."

## (3) Synonyms {.unnumbered}

- If the meaning you identified in (2) has a link to the Historical Thesaurus of the *OED* click the link.

- Review the list of synonyms. Identify the ones that were in use with the relevant meaning when your author wrote. List these words in your report, labeled "Synonyms." If the *OED* gives no link to the Historical Thesaurus under the given meaning, you may try searching the Historical Thesaurus directly. (See the video introduction, linked under the [Background information], above.)

## (4) Discussion {.unnumbered}

Discuss the word and your author's use of it in the quotation you selected in (1). This section should be formatted as continuous expository prose (that is, as sentences and paragraphs) and labeled "Discussion."
Before you write, study all parts of the entry you identified in (2). Examine linked and related entries as well. 
Report whatever seems to you most relevant, useful, or interesting.
For instance, consider these questions:

- When your author wrote, was the word a recent addition to the English language, or did it already have a long history of use in this language?

- When your author wrote, was the meaning you identified in (2) a recent development, or well established?

- Does the definition given in (2) adequately capture the meaning of the word as used in the quotation you selected in (1)? If you think not, explain why and propose a more exact definition.

- When your author wrote, did the word have many meanings or few?

- When your author wrote, how frequent was the word in English?

- Where did the word come from? If it was borrowed from another language or languages, which one(s)?

- If you identified synonyms in (3), why might your author have selected this word, in preference to the others listed in the Historical Thesaurus? How would the sentence be changed, if your author had used one of those synonyms instead?

- How do particular features of the word contribute to the meaning of the passage in which you found it, and the story as a whole?

# Rubric {#rubric-dictionary-report}

Successful dictionary reports have the following characteristics:

- The *format* is correct, following all instructions
- *Information* is accurate: this includes the quotation and page-number reference; *OED* entry, meaning, and citation; list of synonyms; and any other information reported in the discussion
- The *discussion* is clear, perceptive, inquisitive, well organized, grammatically correct, and makes effective use of the dictionary

Points are allocated as follows (10 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
formal details | 3
*OED* entry and meaning | 2
synonyms | 1
discussion | 4

A report with inaccurate, incomplete, or unverifiable references will receive additional point deductions.
