---
title: Summary of written assignments for ENGL 299 (plain text writing)
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- writing intensive
- note-taking
- ENGL 299
- plaintext
- fall 2025
dates:
  era: ''
  year: '2025'
---

This writing-intensive seminar includes the following major types of written assignment:

- **Low-stakes in-class writing**.
  See the class days marked "Writing workshop" on the [Schedule](#schedule).
  Graded as participation.
- **Note collections**.
  Two collections of reading notes, each comprising ten structured notes and a 500-word reflective overview.
  The first note-collection is on shared course readings; the second is a step toward the research essay.
- **Revision of an essay written in a prior class**.
  Each student will take one of their own previous essays as a starting point for revision and development, using the writing tools introduced in this seminar.
  The deliverables are (1) an annotated history of revision, (2) the completed revision, and (3) a 500-word reflective overview on the process of revision.
  See the [Step-by-Step Recipe for the Essay Revision Unit](https://github.com/icornelius/plain-text-tutorials/releases/latest/download/essay-revision-tutorial.pdf).
  (This is published as a separate PDF.)
- **A research essay and presentation**.
  In the second half of the semester students conduct research into some aspect of generative artificial intelligence and report their research in a formal academic essay.
  This may be done solo or in groups of two or three.
  The final essay should be about 3,500 words in length, not including works cited.
  (This is equivalent to about 12 pages, double-spaced, printed on 8½×11 inch paper with typical font size and margins.)
  As steps toward the final product, students will submit a research proposal, note collection (see above), and draft.
  The proposal and draft are ungraded but required as a condition for earning points on the final product.
  Students will present their process and product in the final exam period.
