---
title: Instruction for translation and commentary
tags:
- assignments
- ENGL 390
- fall 2024
- translation
- critical commentary
- writing
- GenAI
- Middle English
- MED
- OED
- language
- rubric
---

Each student will produce two critical commentaries on a passage of Middle English poetry, portfolio of translations of the passage into Present Day English (PDE), and commentary on the translations.
These are termed "translations and commentaries".

# General instructions {#general-instructions-trans-comm}

Each translation and critical commentary consists of the following parts:

1. A passage of about 8 lines of Middle English poetry from a course reading.

1. A published or publicly available translation of this passage into PDE.

1. A translation of the passage into PDE, produced by a generative artificial intelligence application.

1. A commentary on differences between the translations in (2) and (3).

1. A commentary on the original Middle English passage.

1. Bibliographic details for all sources.

Clearly label all parts.
Print a copy, observing the [general instructions for written assignments](#instructions-for-written-work).
Printed and electronic copies are due at the beginning of class on the dates indicated on the [Course Schedule](#schedule).

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-trans-comm}

## The original passage {.unnumbered}

Your passage should be a coherent grammatical unit.
Do not begin or end within a clause; do not include a subordinate clause without also including the main clause that it modifies.

Keyboard the passage from our textbook. 
Check the result, letter-by-letter, to correct typographic errors.

## The published translation {.unnumbered}

Use one of the translations on reserve in Cudahy Library or find a translation on-line by web search.
See instructions for the [citations and bibliography](#citations-and-bibliography), below.

## The commentary on translations {.unnumbered}

Describe the prompt you used to generate the AI translation, then identify and discuss specific differences between the two translations, including differences in word choice, sentence structure, and punctuation.
Refer to historical dictionaries (the *Oxford English Dictionary* and *Middle English Dictionary*) where relevant.
Where you observe a meaning captured by neither translation, offer your own translation and justify it.
On the basis of the differences you observe, propose a general characterization of the two translations.
This commentary should be about 300 words in length.

## The critical commentary on the original passage {.unnumbered}

Critical commentary aims to show how the details of language and form contribute to the meaning works of literary verse or prose.
Critical commentary should explain what is said in the passage under consideration:

- Who is speaking?
- What is the scene?
- How does the passage fit within larger arcs of narrative and thematic development?

Yet the focus should be on the *how* of saying:

- vocabulary and word choice
- metaphor, simile, and other figures of speech
- rhyme and other sound patterns, if significant
- sentence structure, style, and tone

Consider the following questions:

- What is distinctive about the vocabulary; what do individual words contribute to the meaning of the passage?
- If there is figurative language, how does it work and what does it contribute?
- Is the style colloquial, formal, or a mix of the two? What details create this impression?
- How do the qualities of the passage under consideration relate to the wider stylistic, thematic, or narrative development of the poem?

Write about the details that promise the best return on the attention you invest in them.

Be sure to read the editor's notes and marginal word-glosses on your passage.
Refer at least twice to a historical dictionary of the English language (either the *Middle English Dictionary* or the *Oxford English Dictionary*).
Your critical commentary should be approximately 300 words in length.

## Citations and bibliography {.unnumbered}

Supply full, accurate bibliographical details for all sources (including the edition of the original Middle English text) in MLA or Chicago format.
For guidance on citing the output of generative artificial intelligence applications, see MLA's guide ["How do I cite generative AI in MLA style?"](https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/)
or the Chicago Manual of Style's Q&A on [citing content developed or generated by artificial intelligence](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/qanda/data/faq/topics/Documentation/faq0422.html).
For guidance in citing the *Oxford English Dictionary* and *Middle English Dictionary* see [How to cite the OED and MED](#how-to-cite-the-oed-and-med).

# Rubric {#rubric-trans-comm}

Successful translations and critical commentaries have the following characteristics:

- *Quotations* are accurate
- *Terminology* is appropriate to the task and handled effectively
- *Commentary* on the passages (translations and original Middle English) is accurate, perceptive, inquisitive, well organized, and supported by appropriate evidence (including reference to historical dictionaries)
- *Your prose* is clear and grammatically correct
- *Citations and Bibliography* are complete, accurate, and correctly formatted

Points are allocated as follows (20 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
accuracy (fact and form) | 3
grammar | 2
style | 3
argument | 6
organization | 3
citations and bibl. | 3

Incorrect or missing bibliographic details may result in further point deductions.
