---
title: Instructions for passage identification and commentary
summary: Version for Exploring Poetry, with section headings
comment: For ENGL 271, modifying the version used for HONR 101 (mixed genre in translation)
tags:
- quizzes
- passage id
- critical commentary
- instructions
- ENGL 271
- poetry
- handout
---

# Instructions for passage identification and commentary

Identify the passage, analyze its construction, and discuss its significance.
Here are some possible topics for discussion:

- Who is the author and what is the title of the poem<!--work-->?
- What is the form, genre, or type of writing illustrated in the passage?
- What is the context of the passage, and who (if relevant) is the speaker?
  If there is a pronoun, identify its antecedent.
- How do specific details of language contribute to the meaning of the passage?
  Identify significant details of sound, rhythm and meter, word choice, syntax and word order, figurative language, and other relevant literary conventions.
- What themes or issues are raised by the passage and its context?
- How does the passage contribute to the meaning of the poem<!--work--> as a whole?

Use your judgment and write about details that repay the investment of attention you give them.

# Rubric
Points are assigned according to the following rubric:

1. Correctly identifies the author and poem<!--work-->.
2. Vague or diffuse commentary; possible significant errors in identification of speaker or context, or understanding of the passage, or handling of materials introduced in lecture or discussion.
3. Adequate answer.
4. Strong answer; responds to most questions above and uses relevant materials introduced in lecture or discussion; possible minor flaws in clarity or focus, or in handling of course materials.
5. Clear, accurate, precise observations about the passage; observations are organized into a concise and persuasive argument about the construction and meaning of the poem<!--work-->.
