---
title: Note-taking assignment (for 300-level ENGL)
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- note-taking
- writing
- ENGL 323
- rubric
---

# General instructions {#note-collections-general}
Each student will produce two collections of structured research notes:

- A first collection is due on the date listed on the [Schedule](#schedule).
  Notes should be drawn from course materials read to that point.
- A second collection is due one week after your class presentation (see [Class Presentation](#class-presentation)).
  Notes should be drawn from the sources used in your presentation, or subsequent research on the topic of your presentation.

# Detailed instructions {#note-collections-detailed}
A note collection has three parts, as follows:

1. A collection of ten notes. Each note should have the following components:

   (a) A unique identifier for the note, for instance, an integer between 1 and 10

   (a) A unique title, to serve as a concise meaningful way of referencing the note

   (a) A quotation. This is the nucleus of the note.

   (a) The source citation in MLA or Chicago format, as it would appear in a list of Works Cited.
      For guidance in the formatting of citations, see the instructions at the [Purdue Online Writing Lab](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/index.html) or another reputable source.

   (a) A 'point locator', allowing the quotation to be located within the source. Usually this will be the page number on which the quotation appears.

   (a) Commentary.
      Here you may elaborate the significance of the quotation (why is it noteworthy?),
      situate the quotation within the argument of the source,
      identify key terms or concepts,
      identify connections with other notes in your collection,
      or enter into dialogue with the quoted statement by extending it to a new topic or raising a challenge or objection.
      The commentary should be about twice the length of the quoted passage.

   (a) Three to five descriptive keywords. **For this portion only, you may consult a generative artificial intelligence application**.
      [Copilot](https://copilot.microsoft.com/) is available to Loyola students fee of charge: select the option 'sign in through your institution', then use your Loyola email address.
      If you ask the chatbot's help, give some thought to [prompt engineering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prompt_engineering).
      You remain responsible for the keywords: if the chatbot gives you uninformative or incorrect keywords, do not use them.
      Good descriptive keywords pick out central and distinctive concepts.
      In a collection of notes, good keywords will usually cluster, forming a network of relations among notes: each note-item is likely to have some keywords shared by some other note-items.

1. An overview of your note collection.
What questions organized your research?
Which sources and search-procedures were most useful and why?
Describe the movement of your attention through your sources, your centers of focus, and connections you observe between individual notes.
What questions do you have at the end of this process?
This overview should be about 500 words.

1. A list of keywords in your collection.
   For each keyword, state the frequency of the keyword in your note collection (that is, the number of note-items to which the keyword is assigned).
   You may organize this as a table.

Observe the [general instructions for written assignments](#policies-on-written-work).
An electronic version should be uploaded to Sakai.
A paper copy should be printed.
Electronic and paper copies are due at the beginning of class.

# Rubric {#note-collections-rubric}

Successful note collections have the following characteristics:

- *Choice of quotes* shows thoughtful and inquisitive engagement with sources; quotes supply good material for other parts of the assignment
- *Formatting* is accurate and consistent (this includes formatting of bibliographical references); quotations are accurate, without typographic or other error
- *Titles* and *keywords* are precise and relevant
- *Commentary* is precise, clear, perceptive and engaged with central ideas in the quote
- The *overview* is a precise, clear, responds to the prompt (above), and wraps the collection into a reasoned, coherent package

Points are allocated as follows (20 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
choice of quotes | 3
formal details (incl. citations) | 4
commentary sections | 4
keywords | 3
overview | 6
