---
title: Presentation assignment for UCLR 100
summary: A class presentation on a literary term
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- presentation
- vocabulary
- literary terms
- UCLR 100
- fall 2024
---

# General instructions {#general-instructions-presentations}

Each student will give a 5-minute presentation, supported by slides.
This may be a group effort if you wish.

The first step is to sign up for a presentation date and, optionally, form a group.
You will do this in the second and third weeks of class.
You may claim a topic at this time or leave your topic undecided while you explore options.

Select a topic from the list in the next section, below.
Clear your topic with me, so that we avoid duplicate presentations.

The following sections provide more detailed instructions for individual components of this assignment.

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-presentations}

## Presentation topics {.unnumbered}

Select a literary term from the [*Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms*](https://www.oxfordreference.com/display/10.1093/acref/9780198715443.001.0001/acref-9780198715443).
This book is available as a digital resource via Loyola University Libraries: select the option "Sign in through your institution."

Here is a list of literary terms suitable for a presentation:

\begin{multicols}{2}
\begin{itemize}
\tightlist

\item actant
\item allegory
\item alliteration
\item allusion
\item ambiguity
\item anacoluthon
\item anadiplosis
\item anagnorisis
\item analepsis (or flashback)
\item analogy
\item anaphora
\item antiphrasis
\item aphorism
\item aporia
\item apostrophe
\item archaism
\item blazon
\item cacophony (or dissonance)
\item catachresis
\item chiasmus
\item chronotope
\item circumlocution (or periphrasis)
\item climax
\item colloquialism
\item connotation
\item crisis
\item cycle
\item defamiliarization (or estrangement)
\item dénouement
\item dialogue
\item diegesis
\item digression
\item dramatis personae
\item envelope
\item epiphany
\item episodic
\item epistrophe
\item euphony
\item exemplum
\item flashback
\item focalization
\item foil
\item frame narrative
\item free indirect style
\item heteroglossia
\item hyperbaton
\item hyperbole
\item hypotactic
\item idiolect
\item implied author
\item implied reader
\item in medias res
\item interior monologue
\item intertextuality
\item intonation
\item intrusive narrator
\item inversion
\item leitmotif
\item litotes
\item macaronic verse
\item malapropism
\item metafiction
\item metalepsis
\item metonymy
\item mise en scène
\item mixed metaphor
\item motif
\item mythos
\item narrative
\item neologism
\item nonce word
\item novel
\item occupatio (or paralipsis)
\item omniscient narrator
\item onomatopoeia
\item oxymoron
\item parable
\item paradox
\item parallelism
\item paratactic
\item paratext
\item paronomasia (or pun)
\item pastiche
\item peripeteia
\item personification
\item pleonasm
\item plot
\item poetic justice
\item point of view
\item polyphonic
\item polysemy
\item polysyndeton
\item portmanteau word
\item prolepsis
\item props
\item proscenium arch
\item protagonist
\item repertory
\item soliloquy
\item story (as used in narratology)
\item stream of consciousness
\item synecdoche
\item tragic flaw
\item unreliable narrator
\item verisimilitude
\item vernacular
\item zeugma

\end{itemize}
\end{multicols}

After you have selected a topic, begin planning your presentation.
Each presentation has three tasks:

1. Tell us what the term means.
   If the *Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms* provides a short entry for your term, quote the entry in full.
   If the entry is long, quote the most important parts.
   Discuss the definition and examples given by the *Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms*. Clarify any difficult points.
1. Use the term. Apply the term in analysis of a song, movie, cartoon, video game, or any verbal artwork not on our syllabus.
   Discuss the effect or significance of the literary device in the example you have selected.
1. Seed a class discussion.
   For instance, you might ask us to respond to your example in (2), or invent another name for the literary device you have selected, or suggest another example of the literary device.

## Slides {.unnumbered}

Good presentations have a mix of concrete, relevant detail (including quotations) and explanatory commentary.
Put key points, factual detail, and quotations on slides; give commentary and explanation in your own voice.

Most students create slides with Google Slides, Canva, or Microsoft PowerPoint.
Aim for clarity and accessibility:

- A clear font such as Times New Roman or Arial
- Unpatterned backgrounds
- Good contrast between lettering and background (black lettering on white background is perfectly fine)
- A font size large enough to read from any seat in our classroom

Don't overwhelm us with lots of text in small type: if your topic for a given slide outgrows the dimensions of the slide, divide it among two or more slides.
Images are welcome, and necessary for some presentation topics.
But do not distract us with irrelevant graphics: keep the focus on your topic.

List your sources on the penultimate slide of your presentation.
These should include at least the *Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms* and a citation for the artwork that you selected as illustration of your term.
Citations should be formatted in MLA or Chicago style.

On the last slide, list one or two questions for discussion.

Before your presentation, post a link to your slides in the "Wiki" section of Sakai, where you signed up for your presentation date.
Configure your document to be *viewable* (not editable) by anyone with the link.

## Delivery {.unnumbered}

Aim to speak for about five minutes.

Speaking from notes or note-cards is perfectly fine.
Unless you are reading a quote, don't read directly from your slides.
But always read the quotations, or ask a volunteer to read them.

Every presentation is followed by a discussion period: here you facilitate a class discussion of the question(s) on your final slide.

# Rubric {#rubric-presentations}

Successful presentations have the following characteristics:

- The literary term is *defined* clearly and accurately, using appropriate sources
- The literary term is *illustrated* with a relevant example. The example is introduced and contextualized. The significance and effects of the literary device are explored in appropriate detail.
- *Sources* are correctly cited
- *Slides* are clear and accessible
- *Delivery* is fluent, well organized, paced appropriately to the content and your audience, and fitted to time limits (neither too long nor too short)
- *Discussion questions* invite thoughtful engagement from peers

Points are allocated as follows (10 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
definition | 2
illustration | 3
slide design | 2
sources | 1
delivery | 1
Q&A | 1

A presentation that duplicates the topic of an earlier presentation in this course will receive additional point deductions.
