---
title: Milton commentary assignment for UCLR
tags:
- assignments
- UCLR 100
- fall 2024
- writing
- OED
- language
- rubric
- GenAI
- Milton, John
dates:
  era: ''
  year: '2024'
---

# General instructions {#general-instructions-poem-report}

Select a short passage from John Milton's *Paradise Lost*, book one, then prompt a generative artificial intelligence application to paraphrase the passage into easy modern English prose.
The prose paraphrase is an example of [lossy data compression](https://www.oed.com/dictionary/lossy_adj).
Write a report on the losses.
Your report should be about 300 words in length, supported by reference to the *Oxford English Dictionary* (*OED*) and literary terms and concepts introduced in this class.

Observe the [general instructions for written assignments](#policies-on-written-work).
Electronic and paper copies are due at the beginning of class on the date indicated on the [Course Schedule](#schedule).

The next sections provide detailed instructions and a rubric.

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-poem-report}

## The original passage {.unnumbered}

Your passage should be a coherent grammatical unit, three to five lines in length.
You may begin or end mid-line, if doing so yields a coherent grammatical unit.
Do not begin or end within a clause.

Keyboard the passage from our textbook. 
Check the result, letter-by-letter, to correct typographic errors.
Supply line numbers in parentheses at the end of the passage.

## The prose paraphrase {.unnumbered}

Prompt a generative artificial intelligence application to paraphrase the passage in easy modern English prose.
[Copilot](https://copilot.microsoft.com/) is available to Loyola students free of charge: select the option 'sign in through your institution', then use your Loyola email address.

Quote the bot's paraphrase and describe the prompt you used to generate it.
Identify the generative artificial intelligence application and version number you used (Copilot, ChatGPT 4 or 4o, Gemini, etc.).

## The commentary {.unnumbered}

Discuss specific differences between the prose paraphrase and Milton's verse.
If the bot substituted an easy word for a hard one, research the hard word in the *OED* and consider why Milton might have used it.
If the bot changed the order of words, describe Milton's word order and consider why he might have written that way.
If the bot omitted or ignored parts of the passage, consider what they might contribute to Milton's verse.
If you think the bot got something wrong, discuss the error.

Your commentary should be supported by reference to at least two entries in the *OED*.
Cite these entries as instructed in the section [How to cite the *Oxford English Dictionary*](#how-to-cite-the-oxford-english-dictionary).
Also pay attention to footnotes and marginal glosses in our edition of *Paradise Lost*.
Use these when they are helpful and cite them parenthetically as "note to line x", replacing *x* with the line number.

## Use and citation of AI {.unnumbered}

Everyone should use an artificial intelligence application to generate the prose paraphrase.
When you have done that, you have two options:

1. Close the generative artificial intelligence application and make no further use of this technology
1. Prompt the generative artificial intelligence application to analyze and comment on the paraphrase it has produced

If you choose option (1) your commentary should begin with the statement "I have not used generative AI for this section."
If you choose option (2) your commentary should begin with the statement "This section was written with the help of generative AI."
**Commentaries that do not begin with one or the other of these statements will receive a zero.**
Both options may receive full credit.

If you consult an AI, you are responsible for judging the accuracy and value of the outputs generated, and you must cite the specific words and ideas that derive from the AI.
For guidance on citing the output of generative artificial intelligence applications, see MLA's guide ["How do I cite generative AI in MLA style?"](https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/).

# Rubric {#rubric-poetry-report}

Successful poetry reports have the following characteristics:

- The *quotation* from Milton's verse is accurate, of appropriate length, and grammatically coherent
- The *format* is correct, following all instructions
- *Commentary* is accurate, perceptive, inquisitive, well organized, and supported by appropriate evidence (including reference to the *OED*)
- *Your prose* is clear and grammatically correct
- *Citations* are complete, accurate, and correctly formatted

Points are allocated as follows (10 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
quality of observation | 3
use of the *OED* | 2
organization | 2
grammar and style | 1
formal details | 2

Incorrect or missing citations will result in further point deductions.
