---
title: General instructions for slide design and delivery
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- presentation
- boilerplate
- instructions
---
# Slides {.unnumbered}

Good presentations are well organized, with an appropriate mix of relevant detail (including quotations) and explanatory commentary and interpretation.
Put section titles, key points, factual detail, and quotations on slides; give explanation and interpretation in your own voice.

Most students create slides with Google Slides, Canva, or Microsoft PowerPoint.
Aim for clarity and accessibility:

- A clear font such as Times New Roman or Arial
- Unpatterned backgrounds
- Good contrast between lettering and background (black lettering on white background is perfectly fine)
- A font size large enough to read from any seat in our classroom

Don't overwhelm us with lots of text in small type: if your topic for a given slide outgrows the dimensions of the slide, divide it among two or more slides.
Images are welcome but do not distract us with irrelevant graphics: keep the focus on your topic.

Introduce your topic and show its connection to our course.
If you narrowed an unwieldy topic into one more manageable, 'zoom in' from the larger topic to your chosen subtopic.

List your sources on the penultimate slide of your presentation (these may be split across two or more slides if needed).
Citations should be formatted in MLA or Chicago style.
For guidance see [Citing Sources](citing-sources).

On the last slide, list two or three questions for discussion.

Before your presentation, post a link to your slides in the "Wiki" section of Sakai, where you signed up for your presentation date.
Configure your document to be *viewable* (not editable) by anyone with the link.

# Delivery {.unnumbered}

Aim to speak for between five and ten minutes.

Speaking from notes or note-cards is perfectly fine.
Unless you are reading a quote from a primary or secondary source, don't read directly from your slides.
But always read the quotations, or ask a volunteer to read them.

When you reach the slide showing your sources, comment briefly on each one.
Describe how you located each source and what it contributed to your understanding of your topic.

Every presentation is followed by a discussion period: here you take questions from your audience and facilitate a class discussion of the questions on your final slide.
