---
title: Instructions for a summary of relevant previous scholarship on a research topic
bibkey: '@WaltersFabricationErrorsBibliographic2023'
tags:
- writing intensive
- research
- instructions
- ENGL 299
---
Write a one-paragraph overview of previous research on your topic. Your paragraph should be composed of clear, grammatical sentences, referencing between eight and twelve secondary sources. The purpose of the paragraph is to classify these sources into reasoned groups. Explain the relevance of each group to your project. A model is supplied by the section "Previous research" in Walters and Wilder (2023).

After drafting your paragraph, run the checks for clarity, described in *The Craft of Research*, sections 15.2, 15.3, and 15.5. Revise accordingly. (You previously performed these checks in the revision assignment, steps 41-43 in the step-by-step instructions.)

This assignment is ungraded but required as a condition for earning points on the final product. You may type or paste text into the window below, attach a file, or direct me to a GitHub repository.

Unless you direct me to a GitHub repository, sources should be cited in [Chicago author-date format](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide/citation-guide-2.html) with parenthetical in-text citations and a corresponding list of references at the end. If you direct me to a GitHub repository, use the citation method we employed in essay revision (steps 18-22 in the step-by-step instructions): citation keys in your Markdown file, with corresponding bibliographic details in CSL JSON format.
