---
title: Research topics for Medieval British Survey
bibkey: '@BlackBroadviewAnthologyBritish2023'
summary: Anthology items and historical topics
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- research
- presentation
- instructions
- ENGL 320
- fall 2025
- Middle English
- Old English
- medieval Britain
---

# Presentation topics {.unnumbered}

Students may choose between two basic types of presentation topic:

- An author or work included in our textbook [@BlackBroadviewAnthologyBritish2023] but not included in the [schedule of readings](#schedule) for this course
- A topic pertaining to historical, cultural, or social contexts or backgrounds to medieval British literature

Here are suggestions for a presentation on an author or work.
Page references are to our textbook.

- "Me and white Pangur" or another Old Irish lyric (pp. 31--38)
- A riddle from the Exeter Book (pp. 55--59)
- Poems of Meir b. Elijah of Norwich. Not in our textbook but see @CrasnowLightMedievalHebrew2013.
- "Sumer is icumen in" or another Middle English lyric (pp. 248--60)
- Julian of Norwich's *Revelation of Love* (pp. 617--34)
- The York play of the Crucifixion or another cycle play (pp. 700--52)
- The play *Mankind* (pp. 753--73)
- Thomas Malory's *Morte Darthur* (p. 774--829)

Here are suggestions for a presentation on a contextual or background topic.
Page references are again to our textbook.

- Love and marriage in medieval Britain (pp. 384--409)
- Celtic Christianity (pp. XLII, 659--62)
- The Book of Kells (p. XLI)
- The Lindisfarne Gospels (pp. XXV, XXXVI, and color insert)
- Sutton Hoo (color insert)
- Vikings and the Danelaw (pp. XLV--XLVI)
- Cathedrals (pp. 663--64 and color insert)
- Parochial religious teaching (pp. 664--71)
- The regular clergy (monks, nuns, and friars) (pp. 671--80)
- Scholasticism (pp. 680--81)
- Miracles and relics (pp. 681--87)
- Lollardy (pp. 690--94)
- Persecution of Jews (pp. 694--97)
- Famine (p. 262)
- The Hundred Years' War (pp. 263--66)
- The Black Death (pp. 266--68)
- The Uprising of 1381 (pp. 268--74)
- William Caxton and the first English printed books (pp. LXIV--LXV)

These are only suggestions, prompted by materials in our textbook.
Other topics are possible, and many of those listed above are best narrowed or divided.
If the topics above do not appeal to you, try browsing the contents of the reference resources listed in the next section.

Whether you chose a topic from these lists or design your own, clear your topic with me.
You can do this by visiting office hours, talking with me before or after class, or sending me an email.

Expect your topic to shift as you research it, but beware of scope creep.
A good topic is coherent and not over-large.
If your topic cannot be illustrated with appropriate concrete detail in the space of ten minutes, select a narrower subtopic.

# Research {.unnumbered}

Begin your research by consulting standard reference works.
Some good ones for this course are
@BjorkOxfordDictionaryMiddle2010,
@LapidgeWileyBlackwellEncyclopediaAngloSaxon2014,
and
@RosenfeldChaucerEncyclopedia2023.
All are available on-line through Loyola's library catalog.
Where these entries provide recommendations for further reading, follow the bibliographic trail.
Also check for entries on your topic in the [Oxford Bibliographies in Medieval Studies](https://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/browse?module_0=obo-9780195396584).


The Cambridge Companion series is another good early stop.
@BeadleCambridgeCompanionMedieval2008,
@DaRoldCambridgeCompanionMedieval2020,
@DinshawCambridgeCompanionMedieval2003,
@GallowayCambridgeCompanionMedieval2011,
@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013,
and
@ScanlonCambridgeCompanionMedieval2009,
among others,
may contain essays of use to you, depending on your topic.
Again, all are available on-line through Loyola's library catalog.


A basic keyword search of [Loyola's library catalog](https://libraries.luc.edu/) or [JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/) will often produce useful leads, among others less useful or irrelevant.


Non-scholarly sources are not acceptable for this assignment:
sources should be scholarly books, essays, or research articles, or digital on-line resources to which Loyola subscribes.
Exceptions to this policy require prior approval.
The purpose of this restriction is to give you experience in locating, retrieving, and using professional scholarly research.


To access e-books, databases, and other on-line library resources, use an on-campus internet connection, or follow instructions for [off-campus access to digital resources](https://libraries.luc.edu/offcampus), or select the option "Log in through your institution" and follow the instructions from there.


Three high-quality sources are probably sufficient for this assignment.
If you have a question or encounter difficulties, ask me or a [Library specialist](http://libraries.luc.edu/specialists).
