---
title: Presentation assignment for ENGL 271
summary: Instructions for a presentation on a literary term or a poem
tags:
- syllabus
- instructions
- presentation
- vocabulary
- literary terms
- poetry
- ENGL 271
- spring 2024
---
Each student will give a 5-minute presentation, supported by slides.
This may be a group effort if you wish.

The first step is to sign up for a presentation date and, optionally, form a group.
You will do this in the second and third weeks of class.
You may claim a topic at this time or leave your topic undecided while you explore options.

Before your presentation, post slides (or a link to them) in the "Forums" section of Sakai.
If you are posting a link, configure your document to be viewable by anyone with the link.

Usually a presentation will be followed by class discussion;
the best presentations invite thoughtful response from your peers.

You may choose between two types of presentation, as follows.

# Presentations on poems {.unnumbered}
Select a poem not on our syllabus.
Present the poem to the class by displaying the poem (or a passage from it) in a slide, reading the poem aloud twice, and drawing our attention to the features that, in your view, are most significant.
Be guided by the instructions for "passage identification and critical commentary" quizzes.

Additional notes:

- You may present a poem in a language other than English. If you do, provide the text of the poem in both languages, read the poem in both languages, and describe some of the ways the original differs from the translation.
- You may present the lyrics of a song. If you do, treat them as a poem: provide us with the text and read the lyrics yourself, twice, even if you also play a sound recording of the musician performing.

# Presentations on literary terms {.unnumbered}
Select a literary term from the *Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics*.
Your presentation has two parts.
First, identify the literary term. Summarize the most important elements of the entry in the *Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics*.
How is the term defined? What illustrations are given?
If there is a corresponding entry in the *Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms*, compare it with the one in the *Princeton Encyclopedia*.
(Entries in the *Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms* are always shorter.)
Second, use the term. Apply the term in analysis of a poem, song, movie, video game, or another verbal artwork, or compose your own illustration. Be creative.

Here are some terms<!--40--> suitable for a presentation:

> abecedarius,
aleatory poetics,
alliteration,
allusion,
aporia,
apostrophe,
archaism,
asyndeton,
blason,
cacophony,
catachresis,
chiasmus,
commonplace,
dead metaphor,
defamiliarization,
ekphrasis,
hendiadys,
hyperbaton,
litotes,
macaronic verse,
metaphor,
metonymy,
nonsense verse,
objective correlative,
onomatopoeia,
oxymoron,
paradox,
paralipsis,
parallelism,
paronomasia,
periphrasis,
refrain,
ring composition,
simile,
syncope,
synecdoche,
tmesis,
topos,
xenoglossia,
zeugma
