---
title: Class presentation for HEL
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- presentation
- ENGL 300
- HEL English language history
- rubric
---

# General instructions {#general-instructions-presentations}

Students will each give one class presentation.
This may be a group effort if you wish.

The first step is to sign up for a presentation date and, optionally, form a group.
The next step is to select a topic.
Topics must be drawn from readings listed on the [Course Schedule](#schedule) for the day of your presentation.

Meet with your instructor during the week before your presentation.
(This is a required step.)
In this meeting we will identify a topic and discuss strategies and sources.
Once I have approved your topic, begin research.
The purpose of research is to extend, deepen, and contextualize the treatment of your topic in the course reading.

Aim to speak for about ten minutes, supported by slides.
Each presentation is followed by open discussion.

The following sections provide more detailed instructions for individual components of this assignment.

# Detailed instructions {#detailed-instructions-presentations}

## Research {.unnumbered}

For most topics you will find useful material in the *Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language* (ed. Crystal) and the Wiley-Blackwell *Companion to the History of the English Language* (ed. Momma and Matto).
Check these sources first.
See the [Bibliography](#bibliography) for full references.

For some topics a basic keyword search of [Loyola's library catalog](https://libraries.luc.edu/) or [JSTOR](https://www.jstor.org/) or [Project MUSE](https://muse.jhu.edu/) will produce useful leads, among others less useful or irrelevant.
If you have a question about the relevance of a resource, ask me.
To access e-books, databases, and other on-line library resources, use an on-campus internet connection, or follow instructions for [off-campus access to digital resources](https://libraries.luc.edu/offcampus), or select the option "Log in through your institution" and follow the instructions from there.
If you have a question about access to a particular resource, ask me or a [Library specialist](http://libraries.luc.edu/specialists).

Non-scholarly sources located by general web searches are not acceptable for this assignment:
sources must be printed books or digital on-line resources to which Loyola subscribes.
Exceptions to this policy require prior approval.
The purpose of this restriction is to give you experience in locating, retrieving, and using professional scholarly research on a topic you have identified.
Have a question? Ask me.

Three high-quality sources are probably sufficient for this assignment.

## Slides {.unnumbered}

Good presentations are well organized and have an appropriate mix of concrete, relevant detail (including quotations) and explanatory commentary and interpretation.
Put section titles, key points, factual detail, and quotations on slides; give explanation and interpretation in your own voice.

Most students create slides with Google Slides, Canva, or Microsoft PowerPoint.
Aim for clarity and accessibility:

- A clear font such as Times New Roman or Arial
- Unpatterned backgrounds
- Good contrast between lettering and background (black lettering on white background is perfectly fine)
- A font size large enough to read from any seat in our classroom

Don't overwhelm us with lots of text in small type: if your topic for a given slide outgrows the dimensions of the slide, divide it among two or more slides.
Images are welcome but do not distract us with irrelevant graphics: keep the focus on your topic.

Introduce your topic and show its connection to our course.
If you narrowed an unwieldy topic into one more manageable, 'zoom in' from the larger topic to your chosen subtopic.

List your sources on the penultimate slide of your presentation (these may be split across two or more slides if needed).
Citations should be formatted in MLA or Chicago style.

On the last slide, list two or three questions for discussion.

Before your presentation, post a link to your slides in the "Wiki" section of Sakai, where you signed up for your presentation date.
Configure your document to be *viewable* (not editable) by anyone with the link.

## Delivery {.unnumbered}

Aim to speak for about ten minutes.
Speaking from notes or note-cards is perfectly fine.
Unless you are reading a quote from a primary or secondary source, don't read directly from your slides.
But always read the quotations, or ask a volunteer to read them.

Every presentation is followed by a discussion period: here you take questions from your audience and facilitate a class discussion of the questions on your final slide.

# Rubric {#rubric-presentations}

Successful presentations have the following characteristics:

- The *topic* is relevant to this course, appropriately sized, well defined, and unique (not covered by a previous presentation)
- *Content* is accurate, informative, relevant, appropriately detailed, clearly explained, and well organized
- *Sources* are works of professional scholarship appropriate to the topic and correctly cited
- *Slides* are clear and accessible
- *Delivery* is fluent, well organized, paced appropriately to the content and your audience, and fitted to time limits (neither too long nor too short)
- *Discussion questions* are relevant to the topic and invite thoughtful engagement from peers

Points are allocated as follows (10 points total):

Component | Point value
----------|------------:
topic | 2
content | 3
sources | 2
slide design | 1
delivery | 1
Q&A | 1

A presentation that duplicates the topic of an earlier presentation in this course will receive additional point deductions.
