---
title: Quizzes in core classes
comment: For ENGL 271, modifying the versions used for HONR 101 (mixed genre in translation)
tags:
- syllabus
- quizzes
- HONR 101
- UCLR 100
- ENGL 271
- passage id
- critical commentary
- instructions
- poetry
---
There are regular quizzes, usually on Tuesdays, beginning in second week.
It is usually not possible to make up a missed quiz.
Exceptions are made for absences on account of a sponsored university event (for instance, mock trial) or illness: see [Attendance](#attendance) and [Public health](#public-health).
To qualify for a make-up quiz, notify me by email in advance of class.
Your lowest two quiz scores will be dropped, i.e., not counted towards your course grade.


There are two basic formats for quizzes.
Some quizzes will have five questions, worth one point each.
Questions may be multiple choice, true-or-false, or short answer.
These quizzes test your reading comprehension and understanding of lectures and class activities.
Literary terms introduced by peers in the [presentation](#class-presentation) are eligible to appear on quizzes.

Other quizzes will ask you to identify and comment on a short passage of poetry.
Here are some possible topics for discussion:

- Who is the author and what is the title of the poem<!--work-->?
- What is the form, genre, or type of writing illustrated in the passage?
- What is the context of the passage, and who (if relevant) is the speaker?
  If there is a pronoun, identify its antecedent.
- How do specific details of language contribute to the meaning of the passage?
  Identify significant details of sound, rhythm and meter, word choice, syntax and word order, figurative language, and other relevant literary conventions.
- What themes or issues are raised by the passage and its context?
- How does the passage contribute to the meaning of the poem<!--work--> as a whole?

Use your judgment and write about details that repay the investment of attention you give them.

Points are assigned according to the following rubric:

1. Correctly identifies the author and poem<!--work-->.
2. Vague or diffuse commentary; possible significant errors in identification of speaker or context, or understanding of the passage, or handling of materials introduced in lecture or discussion.
3. Adequate answer.
4. Strong answer; responds to most questions above and uses relevant materials introduced in lecture or discussion; possible minor flaws in clarity or focus, or in handling of course materials.
5. Clear, accurate, precise observations about the passage; observations are organized into a concise and persuasive argument about the construction and meaning of the poem<!--work-->.
