---
title: Course description and objectives
summary: English language history
tags:
- syllabus
- course description
- ENGL 300
- ENGL 406
- fall 2026
- HEL English language history
---

# ENGL 406

The English language originated in migration and settlement.
The area of settlement was subsequently named "England," a region with a complex linguistic ecology where English developed into a kaleidoscope of local dialects.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the language began to spread beyond the British isles; during the same period the language contracted into a standard written form.
Today English is diversifying again, on account of its worldwide use by some 2 billion people, most of whom are multilingual.

In this seminar we study the structure and history of this language, focusing on the period before 1800: Indo-European, Germanic, Old English, Middle English, and Early Modern English.
Important developments in the period after 1800 will not be ignored, but they are not our focus: this course fulfills the pre-1800 requirement for the English MA and the Medieval and Renaissance requirement for the English PhD.
Students whose primary areas of interest lie nearer the present day will nevertheless benefit.
The linguistic concepts taught in this course have general application.
Moreover, the famous irregularities in Present Day English --- for example, "silent" letters, irregular verbs, and irregular plural nouns --- are inheritances from the earliest periods of the history of the language.

Topics include speech sounds and writing systems;
words as units of meaning and structure;
variation, standardization, dialect, and register;
diachrony and synchrony;
language contact and multilingualism;
sociolinguistic status and domains of use;
technologies of communication;
and tools for language study (the International Phonetic Alphabet, the Oxford English Dictionary, linguistic corpora).
