---
title: Textual Criticism
tags:
- ENGL 413
- textcrit
- bibliography
---

We first survey concepts of "text" (as defined within neighboring disciplines and discursive traditions) and some general characteristics of systems of writing.
We then turn to a constellation of sub-disciplines of literary studies, influentially designated "bibliography":
techniques for identifying, enumerating, and referencing textual sources;
book-production as a branch of the history of technology;
strategies for investigating the physical production of particular books;
conventions for descriptive cataloging of books and other text-bearing media;
and strategies for investigating the vicissitudes of textual works.
The last of these is properly termed "textual criticism."
It pertains whenever a textual work exists in differentiated states, and it draws on each of the other parts of bibliography to explain the likenesses and differences.
Often, explanation is delivered as a narrative of textual genesis and transmission.
Sometimes, explanation informs a new presentation of the work, in the form of a scholarly edition.
Scholarly editions, and theories that inform them, receive special attention in this course, due to their foundational role in text-based humanistic disciplines.
Students and scholars need reliable texts for reading, reference, and interpretation;
textual criticism provides the tools for production and evaluation of editions.
During the past forty years, much of this work has been done with the assistance of computers.
We take due note of that, on the principle that scholars should make effective use of tools relevant to their areas of work.
Students in this course will deliver class presentations and produce a series of written artifacts, culminating in a final project on a text of their choice.
