---
title: Description of ENGL 296
tags:
- syllabus
- course description
- fall 2025
- ENGL 299
- writing intensive
- plaintext
- GenAI
---

This course trains students in free, open-source, and text-based software to support  clear, well-organized, accurate, and verifiable writing in academic contexts. The software tool-chain includes Zotero, LaTeX, Pandoc, and Git. Key writing skills are note-taking, information management, and revision.

Modern computers provide two basic paradigms for document authoring: What You See is What You Get (WYSIWYG) and What You See Is What You Mean ([WYSIWYM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYM)).
Most people use the WYSIWYG paradigm without knowing it; this course introduces students to the other paradigm, centered on meaning.
We venture beyond word-processing programs (such as Microsoft Word) and web-based emulations of them (such as Google Docs) to explore an expanded field of modern technologies for writing.
Our focus is on the unique properties of text, a lightweight, versatile medium that has inherent advantages in comparison with proprietary file formats (which lock users in to inefficient, cluttered, and expensive software environments) and in comparison with audio-visual media (which must be tagged with textual metadata to facilitate discovery, interpretation, and accessibility).

In the first half of this class, we develop a minimal tool chain for writing in plain text.
In the second half, we employ these tools in a research project on large language models (LLMs) and generative artificial intelligence.
Assessment is by class participation and a scaffolded sequence of informal and formal writing assignments, with an emphasis on writing process.
