---
title: Standard course description for UCLR 100-E
url: https://www.luc.edu/media/lucedu/english/docsamppdfs/facultyresources/English%20Model%20Syllabus%20Tier%201.pdf
tags:
- syllabus
- course description
- UCLR 100
- core
---
This foundational course in literary studies will require students to read closely and analyze carefully a representative variety of fiction, poetry, and drama, master key literary and critical terms, and explore a variety of core critical approaches to the analysis and interpretation of literature.
This course will also explore important conceptual questions about literature and its study.
What is literature?
Why does it matter?
How has it been conceived in different times and places?
How do we envision the relationship between author, text, and reader?
What is the difference between reading a literary work in its historical context and in the light of our own contemporary time?
Where does meaning come from in literature?
What is literary interpretation and what role does it have in the production of literary meaning?
How are literary works related to culture and society and how do they reflect -- and reflect on -- questions of value and the diversity of human experience?
Exploring these questions will help students develop the skills of analysis and interpretation needed to approach literature in a sophisticated manner.

This course satisfies the first tier of Loyola University's [Core Knowledge Area requirement in Literary Knowledge](https://catalog.luc.edu/undergraduate/university-requirements/university-core/core-area-and-courses/literary-knowledge-inquiry/).
