---
title: Schedule for ENGL 300
tags:
- syllabus
- schedule
- spring 2023
- ENGL 300
- HEL English language history
---
The course schedule complies with the [Loyola University academic calendar](https://www.luc.edu/academics/schedules).
Assignments are due on the day listed.
If there is need to revise the course schedule, I will announce the change in class and on Sakai and publish an updated version of this syllabus.
See [Version Information](#version-information).
Students must take the final exam on the date set by the university.

<!--
- Crystal Encyclopedia
- English historical linguistics: an international handbook
-->

# Course introduction: essential concepts (weeks 1--3) {.unnumbered}
## Language and history {.unnumbered}

**01-18**
Concepts:
structure, variation, communication;

- Read the syllabus
- Complete the [questionnaire](#questionnaire)

**01-20**
Concepts:
prescription, description;
synchronic, diachronic;
internal, external

- Smith and Kim, *This Language, a River*, chap. 1 ("Introduction") [@SmithThisLanguageRiver2017]
- Wikipedia, "History of English" [@WikipediaHistoryEnglish2023]
- "A Timeline for HEL" (pp. xxix--xxxiii in [@MommaCompanionHistoryEnglish2008])
- **Assignment**: extend the timeline by adding events for the twenty-first century

## Speech and writing {.unnumbered}
<!--Omissions:
The history of punctuation (Baker)
-->

**01-23**

- Smith and Kim, chap. 4 ("Introduction to Phonetics and the International Phonetic Alphabet")
- Web resources on English phonology and IPA [@AshworthIntroductionArticulatoryPhonetics; @AshworthIntroductionInternationalPhonetic; @LawsonSeeingSpeechArticulatory2018; @ThompsonColorVowelChart1999]

**01-25**

- Jesperson, "The Child: Sounds" [@JespersenLanguageItsNature1964]
- Martin Duffell (1937-- ), "[Syllable structure and phoneme repetition]" [@DuffellNewHistoryEnglish2008]
- Blockley, "Essential Linguistics" (chap. 3 in @MommaCompanionHistoryEnglish2008), entries on palatalization, allophones, stress shift, phonemic length, diphthongization, raising and fronting
- *Dictionary of American Regional English*, Audio Samples [@DAREAudioSamples].
  Listen to the montage of readings of "Arthur the Rat"

**01-27**

- O'Neil, "English Orthography" [@ONeilEnglishOrthography1980]
- **Assignment**: respond to a prompt on Sakai forums

## Grammar and vocabulary {.unnumbered}

**01-30**
Word-types, word-parts, and words in combination

- Smith and Kim, chap. 1 ("Grammar Fundamentals")
- Blockley, "Essential Linguistics" (chap. 3 in @MommaCompanionHistoryEnglish2008), entries on regularized DO, grammaticalization, complementation, and *you was*

**02-01**
An introduction to the *Oxford English Dictionary*

- "OED Terminology" [@OEDTerminology]. Also browse the other pages at `Home > How to use the OED`
- Bybee on semantic change (pp. 195--207 in [@BybeeLanguageChange2015])
  <!--pdf needed!!!-->
- **Assignment**: word study

**02-03**

- Review
- Research report 1 due

# Contemporary and Late Modern English (weeks 4--7) {.unnumbered}
## Digital English {.unnumbered}

**02-06**
The internet and artificial intelligence

- Crystal on "The long-term consequences of the internet" (pp. 497--507 in @MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012)
  <!--For framing, see also @CurzanCorpusbasedLinguisticApproaches2008, opening paragraph-->
- Thompson on ChatGPT [@ThompsonAIHomework2022]
- **Assignment** ask ChatGPT some questions.<!--perhaps from the DARE Survey!?-->
<!--
  - is the language produced by ChatGPT human? yes and no.
  - imitation, as described by Thompson and in OpenAI whitepapers (connect to Jesperson on children, to Strang on human language)
-->

**02-08**
The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)

- **Assignment**: create an account for the [Corpus of Contemporary American English](https://www.english-corpora.org/coca/).
  Read the documentation and perform a variety of queries.
  Take notes on your queries and their results.
  <!--Research a word or expression; "word of the year"-->

**02-10**

- Writing instruction: note-taking and references

## Migration, colonialism and World Englishes {.unnumbered}
<!--
Alternative readings:
- Kachru, World Englishes
- McArthur, "English world-wide in the twentieth century"
-->

**02-13**

- Smith and Kim, chap. 10 ("The Modern Period and Global Englishes"), pp. 257--287 (through the section "African American English")

**02-15**
Visit the Loyola Literacy Center

- Bailey, "English Among the Languages" (chap. 12 in @MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012)
<!--
Questions for Literacy center:
- Describe the languages of your childhood. What roles did English have? What varieties or dialects of English?
- What does "standard English" mean to you?
- What is your experience of studying English?
-->

**02-17**

- Review
- Research report 2 due

## Confronting variation in England and America, C18--20 {.unnumbered}
<!--
Alternatives:
- Barber, "English in the scientific age"
- Brewer on dictionaries
- Swift, "Proposal for correcting, improving, and ascertaining the English tongue"
- London Times editorial on steam press
-->

**02-20**

- Bailey, *Speaking American*, chap. 8 [@BaileyChicago190019502012]

**02-22**
Meet in [University Archives & Special Collections](https://www.luc.edu/archives/index.shtml), located in Cudahy Library, room 217

- Noah Webster, *Dissertations on the English Language*, pp. 17--40, 288--290 as numbered in the printed artifact (#21--44, 292--294 as imaged by HathiTrust) [@WebsterDissertationsEnglishLanguage1789]
- Baugh and Cable on Noah Webster and American English [@BaughHistoryEnglishLanguage2013]
<!--call list to be supplied!!!
- Johnson dictionary
- Webster grammar
- correspondence
-->

**02-24**

- "From the Preface to Johnson's *Dictionary*" (item 39 in @BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000)
- Tieken-Boon von Ostade, "English at the Onset of the Normative Tradition" (chap. 9 in @MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012).
  Read pp. 316--end (beginning at the section "Language")

## Review and workshop {.unnumbered}

**02-27**

- Workshop

**03-01**

- Workshop

**03-03**

- Note-taking demonstration
- Midterm essay due

**Spring break: class does not meet the week of 03-06**

# Early Modern English (weeks 8--9) {.unnumbered}
**03-13**
Words, words, words
<!--vocabulary (inkhorn terms, dictionaries), dialects -->

- Blank, "The Babel of Renaissance English" (chap. 8 in [@MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012])

**03-15**
Grammatical change, variation, and the uses of aggregation

- Nevalainen, "Mapping change in Tudor English" (chap. 7 in [@MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012])
<!--must be split-->

**03-17**
Meet in [University Archives & Special Collections](https://www.luc.edu/archives/index.shtml), located in Cudahy Library, room 217
<!-- call list:
- Blout's Glossographia
- Essex letter
- Beaumont and Fletcher
-->

- Werner, *Studying Early Printed Books*, chap. 1 [@WernerStudyingEarlyPrinted2019]

**03-20**
A case study: Shakespeare's English

- McKeown, "Shakespeare's Literary Language" (chap. 44 in @MommaCompanionHistoryEnglish2008)
- Shakespeare, *Love's Labor's Lost*, 5.1 (item 31 in @BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000)
- Assignment: select a word from the sample passage; look it up in the *Oxford Dictionary of Original Shakespearean Pronunciation* [@CrystalOxfordDictionaryOriginal2016]

**03-22**
The Great Vowel Shift and the uses of abstraction

- McMahon, "Restructuring Renaissance English" (chap. 6 in [@MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012])
  Read from the beginning through "... setting a chain shift in motion" (p. 201), then skip to the beginning of the section titled "The structural coherence problem" (p. 208) and read to the end.
  Return to the omitted sections if time permits and the topic draws you in

**03-24**
Elaboration and consequences;
England's first printer worries about his language

- Smith, "From Middle to Early Modern English" (chap. 5 in [@MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012])
- William Caxton's preface to the *Eneydos* (*c.*1490) [@BlakeCaxtonOwnProse1973]

# Middle English (weeks 10--11) {.unnumbered}

**03-27**
A case study: fifteenth-century private correspondence
<!--alternative:
- John Trevisa on fourteenth-century primary schools
-->

- A Paston Letter (item 22 in [@BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000])
- Note-collection 1 due

**03-29**
What did Middle English look like?

- Horobin and Smith, *An Introduction to Middle English*, chap. 2 [@HorobinIntroductionMiddleEnglish2002]

**03-31**
Middle English in use

- Horobin and Smith, *An Introduction to Middle English*, chap. 3 [@HorobinIntroductionMiddleEnglish2002]

**04-03**
A multilingual society

- Townend, "Contacts and Conflicts: Latin, Norse, and French" (chap. 3 in @MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012).
Read from the beginning through "... 'grammar-words' such as conjunctions and pronouns" (p. 92), then read from "As has been seen ..." (p. 101) to the end.
- "A Proclamation of Henry III (1258)" (item 13 in @BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000; pp. 160--63 in @HorobinIntroductionMiddleEnglish2002)

**04-05**

- Review

**Class does not meet on 04-08 or 04-10 (Easter holiday)**

# Old English (weeks 12--13) {.unnumbered}

**04-12**
<!--
alternatives:
- Cambridge Companion (Baker on external history; Helmut Gneuss on OE language)
- Hogg-Alcorn introduction
-->

- Baugh and Cable, "Old English" [@BaughHistoryEnglishLanguage2013]

**04-14**

- Baker, "Psalm 1 with Extreme Annotation" [@BakerOldEnglishAerobics]

**04-17**

- Alfred's Preface to the *Pastoral Care* [@BakerOldEnglishAerobics] and item 2 in [@BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000]
<!--activity: prepare two sentences-->

**04-19**

- Cædmon's *Hymn* [@BakerOldEnglishAerobics] and item 3 in [@BurnleyHistoryEnglishLanguage2000]

**04-21**

- Review
- Note-collection 2 due

# Before English (week 14) {.unnumbered}
**04-24**

- Robinson, "The Germanic Language Family" [@RobinsonOldEnglishIts1992]

**04-26**

- Hoad, "Before English" [@MugglestoneOxfordHistoryEnglish2012]

# Course conclusion {.unnumbered}

**04-28**

- Review

**05-04** 3pm.

- Final essay due
