---
title: Texts for spring 2023 UCLR
tags:
- syllabus
- texts
- UCLR 100
- spring 2023
---
Readings are drawn from three kinds of sources:

1. Books that you are responsible for acquiring
2. Digital resources linked within this syllabus
3. PDF documents posted to Sakai

To locate a reading, click on the bracketed number(s) following each reading in the the course [schedule](#schedule).
These bracketed numbers link to the relevant entries in the course [bibliography](#bibliography).
If the bibliographical entry has a url, the reading will be found at that address.
If there is no url, the reading is either
(1) from one of the books that you are responsible for acquiring
or
(2) posted to the Resources page on Sakai.

# Books you must acquire
The following books are required for this course.
A single copy of each is available from Cudahy Library [Course Reserves](https://libraries.luc.edu/reserves).
Copies are available for rental or purchase at the Loyola University Chicago [Lakeshore Campus Bookstore](https://www.bkstr.com/loyolachicagostore/home).

- Kempe, Margery. *The Book of Margery Kempe: A New Translation, Contexts, Criticism.* Translated by Lynn Staley. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2001. ISBN: 978-0-393-97639-7
- Plato. *The Trial and Death of Socrates: Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Death Scene from Phaedo.* Translated by G. M. A. Grube and John M. Cooper. 3rd ed. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2000. ISBN: 978-0-872-20554-3, 978-1-603-84459-8
- Shakespeare, William. *The Tempest.* Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine. Updated ed. Folger Shakespeare Library. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-501-13001-4
- Sophocles. *Antigone, Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus*. Edited by David Grene, Richard Lattimore, Mark Griffith, and Glenn W. Most. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald, David Grene, and Elizabeth Wyckoff. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013. ISBN: 978-0-226-31150-0

Students must acquire copies of these books and bring them to class on the days in which we use them.
(See the [schedule](#schedule)).
If you purchase books from a source other than the campus bookstore, plan ahead and allow for delivery times.

At the bookstore you can also purchase the following book, which is recommended for this course, not required:

- Chaucer, Geoffrey. *The Norton Chaucer: The Canterbury Tales.* Edited by David Lawton. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2019. ISBN: 9780393643503

# Readings supplied as links or PDFs
Other course readings will be distributed on Sakai or as links within this syllabus.
Readings distributed as PDF documents should be printed.
Students are reminded that course readings are protected by copyright and should not be shared outside this course without the instructor's written permission.

# On-line reference works
We use the following on-line reference works:

- [The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms](https://www-oxfordreference-com.flagship.luc.edu/display/10.1093/acref/9780198715443.001.0001/acref-9780198715443)
- [The Oxford English Dictionary](https://www-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/)
- [The Middle English Dictionary](https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary)
- [Seeing Speech: An Articulatory Web Resource for the Study of Phonetics](https://www.seeingspeech.ac.uk/)
- [Harvard University's Geoffrey Chaucer Website](https://chaucer.fas.harvard.edu/)

These are available at no additional cost to you.
Some have been purchased by Loyola University Libraries for your use (for these you will be prompted to authenticate with your UVID);
others are served out on the open web by their creators.
