---
title: Initial blog assignment for 390
tags:
- prompts
- assignments
- ENGL 390
- fall 2022
- week1
- phonology
- writing systems
- International Phonetic Alphabet
mentions:
- Butler, Shane
- O'Neil, Wayne
- Robinson, Andrew
- Horobin, Simon
- Smith, J. J.
---

Write about 250 words in response to one of the following prompts.
Post your reply to the Sakai Blog.

1\. From the readings for this week, select any concept, theoretical approach, argument, or claim that you have not previously encountered in your study of English literature.
Make a connection to some aspect of your studies to date in other coursework.

2\. In a book about the "phonographic claims" of literary writing --- that is, its capacity to encode and transmit sound --- Shane Butler asks us to consider the relations between literature and letters:

> "doubt [about the purpose of writing] may perhaps best be understood in terms of the alphabet itself, the single elements of which are capable of expressing sounds that are less than words, but which, as an ensemble, simultaneously makes possible the inscription of something that is *more* than (mere) language. This latter category is dominated by that class of texts we have come to call 'literature,' after the Latin word for the very letters (*litterae*) of the alphabet. In such texts, literary heights plunge back to their alphabetic base in search of such 'sound effects' as alliteration: to give us more than words, the writer calls attention to what is less than one" [@ButlerAncientPhonograph2015, 15].

Unpack Butler's contrast between what is "more than words" and "what is less than one."
How might the readings for this week contribute to a critical project like the one sketched by Bulter in this passage?
What possibilities do you see here, in connection to your previous study of English literature?
