---
title: Research presentation in Old English
tags:
- syllabus
- assignments
- presentation
- ENGL 321
- Old English
---
Students will research a topic relevant to this class and report their findings in a short class presentation.
This may be a group effort if you wish.

The first step is to sign up for a presentation date and, optionally, form a group.
You will do this in the second and third weeks of class.
You may claim a topic at this time or leave your topic undecided while you explore options.

Select a topic from the list below or develop your own.
Clear your topic with me, so that we avoid duplicate presentations.
Once I have approved your topic, you are ready to begin research.
For that, see instructions for the [note collection](#note-collection), below.

Aim to speak for between five and ten minutes, supported by slides.
Before your presentation, post slides (or a link to them) in the "Forums" section of Sakai.
If you are posting a link, configure your document to be viewable by anyone with the link.

Usually a presentation will be followed by class discussion;
the best presentations invite thoughtful response from your peers.

Here are some possible topics:

- The later history of an Old English word, using the online lexicographical tools available for English, Old and Modern
- Influences of Old English literature on a later writer (possibilities include Tennyson, Hopkins, Auden, Pound, Robert Graves, Robert Lowell, Tolkien, Thom Gunn, Geoffrey Hill, Seamus Heaney, and Jorge Luis Borges)
- Recent archaeological finds from early medieval England
- Recent scholarly debates on use of the term "Anglo-Saxon" to designate the early medieval inhabitants of lowland Britain
- An entry in [@LapidgeWileyBlackwellEncyclopediaAngloSaxon2014] \(the *Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Anglo-Saxon England*, on course reserve) -- e.g.,
*Adventus Saxonum*;
Ælfric of Eynsham;
Æthelred the Unready;
aerial reconnaissance;
agriculture;
Alcuin of York;
Aldelhm;
Alfred;
Amiatinus codex;
*Anglo-Saxon Chronicle*;
animal husbandry;
arms and armour;
Arthur;
Augustine, first bishop of Canterbury;
Bayeux Tapestry;
Bede;
Beowulf manuscript;
Bible;
bookbindings;
Cædmon;
Canterbury;
carpet-pages;
Celts;
cemeteries;
charms;
charters;
children;
clergy;
clothing;
Cnut;
codicology;
coinage;
colloquies;
color;
*comitatus*;
computus;
conversion;
crosses, stone;
Cynewulf;
Danelaw;
dialects;
disease;
Domesday Book;
dragons;
Easter Controversy;
elegies;
Elstob, Elizabeth;
embroidery;
entertainment;
Exeter Book;
feuds;
folklore;
food and drink;
Franks Casket;
Fuller Brooch;
Germanic languages;
Gildas;
glosses;
Gospelbooks;
grammar, Latin;
grave goods;
Gregory the Great;
Hadrian;
hagiography;
Hastings, Battle of;
Hicks, George;
Hild;
hoards;
homilies;
iconography;
illumination;
jewellery;
Jews;
Judith;
Junius, Franciscus;
Junius manuscript;
Kent;
kinship;
labour service;
laws;
libraries;
Lindisfarne;
literacy;
liturgy;
loan-words;
London;
magic;
manumission;
marriage and divorce;
medical literature and medicine;
Mercia;
metalworking;
metre, OE;
mills;
mining and quarrying;
mints and minting;
missionaries;
monasticism;
music;
Normandy;
Northumbria;
nunneries;
oaths;
Old Norse;
paganism;
papacy;
peasants;
penitentials;
personal names;
pilgrimage;
place-names;
poetic technique, OE;
population;
pottery;
preaching;
prose style, OE;
punctuation;
queens;
reeve;
relics and relic cults;
*Rhyming Poem*;
riddles;
roads;
Roman remains;
runes;
Ruthwell Cross;
St. Albans;
schools;
script;
scriptorium;
seals;
settlement;
ships;
slavery;
social class;
Staffordshire Hoard;
sundials;
surgery;
Sutton Hoo;
tapestry;
taxation;
textiles;
thegn;
Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury;
timber building;
towns;
trade;
transport and communication;
'Tremulous Hand';
Vercelli Book;
Vikings;
visions;
wergild;
Wessex;
widow;
wills;
Winchester;
women;
*wyrd*;
York
