---
title: Instructions for the research essay in "English Poetry from Manuscript to Print"
summary: For ENGL 390, Fall 2021, revised for 2022
comment: Prompts are in other zetteln
tags:
- assignments
- writing instruction
- research
- Middle English
- translation
- ENGL 390
- fall 2022
---
Write a research essay in which you advance an interpretative argument about (an aspect of) one of the poems you have read in our course.
Your essay should engage the original language of the poem and the material form(s) in which it circulated.
Due dates and general instructions (including the target page length and requirements for documentation of sources) are stated in the syllabus.

I encourage you to discuss your project with me outside of class.
Email me to set up a meeting time if you cannot attend regular office hours.

# Research and argument
Conduct independent research on your topic.
Follow the bibliographical references within our primary text editions and the secondary literature on our syllabus, and use library catalogues and databases to seek out relevant sources in the print and on-line collections of Loyola's Cudahy Library.
Your essay should use and cite **six** scholarly sources, not counting primary text editions, historical dictionaries, or *Oxford Bibliographies*.
(The *Oxford Bibliographies* are guides to the scholarly literature; they do not count as sources in their own right.)
You should engage with the argument of at least two sources; other sources may supply background or evidentiary support for your argument.

Engaging with the argument of a source means that you devote some space in your essay to exposition of the argument of that source, and that your own argument responds to and enters into conversation with the source, often by extending its argument to new materials, or by modifying, reframing, or contesting its claims.
For more instruction on engaging the argument of secondary sources, see [*The Craft of Research*](https://luc.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=alma99213569556702506&context=L&vid=01LUC_INST:01LUC&search_scope=MyInst_and_CI&isFrbr=true&tab=Everything&lang=en), pp. 39-41 and 89-94.
Quote only when you have something to say in reply to the language quoted.
Always follow quotations with commentary that folds the quotation into your own developing argument.

# Documentation
The Works Cited section should include all secondary sources cited in your essay.
It should also include your citation text(s) -- that is, the edition or editions from which you cite the poem or poems that you interpret.
For guidance on citation styles follow the links in the syllabus ("Formal writing" > "General instructions").

# Working with Middle English
If you write about a work of English literature prior to 1500, quote the original language, followed by a translation into modern English.
The translation may be either your own or a published translation.
Identify clearly the source of translations.
Explain your translational practice early in the essay and be alert to differences between the original text and the translation.
Important divergences or ambiguities should be discussed as part of your argument.
Refer to the historical dictionaries (the *Oxford English Dictionary* and *Middle English Dictionary*) to support your interpretation of key words and passages.
Quote often and always follow quotations with analysis.

The *Middle English Dictionary* extends to 1500.
For English literature written after 1500, use the *Oxford English Dictionary*.
