---
title: Prompts on Chaucer and book history
summary: Introduction to manuscript study
tags:
- assignments
- Chaucer, Geoffrey
- manuscripts
- book history
- fall 2022
- ENGL 390
mentions:
- Ivy, G.S.
- Kerby-Fulton, Kathryn
---

Respond to one of the follow prompts.
For general instructions see the syllabus.

1. G.S. Ivy states that "the whole aim of mediaeval book-making" can be summed up as "the intention to produce an accurate record and the intention of giving aesthetic pleasure" (p. 55).
Select one of these two intentions and describe how it is expressed, drawing on Ivy's article and the Harvard METRO pages.

1. Transcribe the manuscript page depicted on p. 3 of *Opening up Middle English Manuscripts*.
Then briefly describe some of your transcription decisions.
In your discussion, refer to "A transcription is not an edition" (*Opening up Middle English Manuscripts*, pp. 4--5).

1. Translate the following short poem by Chaucer and write a critical commentary on it.
In your commentary on the poem draw on the readings for this week to describe relevant aspects of medieval book-making.
Words followed by an asterisk are glossed in the right column.
Virgules (/) are added by me to mark the mid-line pause. You can ignore these in your translation.

------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------
Adam scriveyn\* / if ever it thee bifalle              *scrivener, copyist*
Boece or Troylus / for to wryten newe,
Under thy long lokkes\*/ thou most have the scalle,\*  *locks / scabby disease of the scalp*
But\* after my makyng / thow wryte more trewe;         *unless*
So ofte adaye / I mot\* thy werk renewe,\*             *must / revise*
It to correcte / and eke to rubbe and scrape,\*        *erase*
And al is thorugh\* / thy negligence and rape.\*       *on account of / haste*
------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------
