---
title: Introductory exercise with Middle English
summary: A single introductory assignment; proceed from here to translation and commentary
comment: written for ENGL 390, fall 2021
tags:
- test
- prompt
- ENGL 390
- fall 2021
- fall 2022
- word study
- Middle English Dictionary
- Oxford English Dictionary
- Harvard Chaucer Glossary
- language history
- Chaucer, Geoffrey
---

From the primary-text reading assignment for this week, select one [word-token](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/types-tokens/#WhaDis) glossed in the edition from which you are reading.
Then do the following:

# Supply bibliographic details for the edition you use
Do this if you are not reading from the preferred edition listed on the syllabus.
Skip this step if you are reading from the preferred edition.

# Identify the word-token that you have selected
Quote the line in which the word-token appears and give the line number.
Quote the editor's gloss on this word.
Here are two examples:

> *his*, glossed 'its' in *Whan that Aprill with his shoures soote* (line 1).

> *corages*, glossed 'hearts' in *So priketh hem Nature in hir corages* (line 11).

# Identify the appropriate entry in the Harvard Chaucer Glossary
Look your word up in the [Harvard Chaucer Glossary](https://chaucer.fas.harvard.edu/pages/glossary);
copy the full text of the appropriate entry.

The initial task here is to identify the word-type that most nearly corresponds to your word-token.
For this token-to-type matching, use the criteria of sense (as conveyed in the editorial gloss) and part of speech (as implied in the editorial gloss and required by grammatical context).

Finding your way to the correct glossary entry may require ingenuity and creative ctrl+f searching.
For *his*, I scroll to the *h-* section of the glossary; or I perform a crtl+f search for "his@" (the keys with the `@` symbol are supplied to facilitate searching).
For *corages*, a ctrl+f search for that character string takes me directly to the entry I seek:

> **his** pron.(1) "(sg. masc. and neuter poss.) his," s.v. his poss. pron., 3rd sing. masc., and neut sb. OED. KEY: his@pron1\
> **his** pron1 5011 his 4872 hise 17 hys 122

> **corage** n. "courage, valor; heart; feelings, disposition; inclination, desire," s.v. courage sb. OED. KEY: corage@n\
> **corage** n 94 corage 78 corages 15 courage 1

Some annotation on these glossary entries:

- The element in bold is the **headword**. This is the spelling under which a glossary or dictionary organizes information about a given word.
- After the headword comes notation of the **part of speech**. If there are two or more words with the same headword spelling and the same part of speech, these are disambiguated with a numeral in parentheses.
- The headword, the part of speech, and the numerical disambiguators together form the **title** of the glossary **entry**.
- After the title comes a brief **definition** of the word. The Harvard Chaucer Glossary places this definition within quotation marks.
- After the definition comes a cross-reference to the corresponding entry in the *Oxford English Dictionary*. "s.v." is an abbreviation for Latin *sub voce* 'under the word'. "s.v. courage sb." means "You will find more information about this word in the *Oxford English Dictionary*, within the entry titled 'courage, n.'" ("sb." = "substantive," here synonymous with "noun").
- The "KEY" is supplied to facilitate ctrl+f searches on the Harvard Chaucer Glossary webpage.
- On the second line of each entry, the Harvard Chaucer Glossary repeats the entry title (headword + part of speech + numerical disambiguator). Then follows the total count of occurrences of this word in [the edition that supplies the text analyzed in this glossary](https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Riverside_Chaucer/E4DXD7Sk7WcC). Finally, the glossary lists all the forms (i.e., spellings) of this word in the edition analyzed and the count of occurrences of each form.

# Look the word up in the *OED* and *MED*
Supply a link to the relevant entries and report something interesting about what you find there.

The cross references supplied by the Harvard Glossary (see annotations, above) are usually accurate and sufficient to locate the correct corresponding entry in the [*Oxford English Dictionary*](https://www-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/).
The headword in the [*Middle English Dictionary*](https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary) is usually the same as the headword in the Harvard Glossary.
Once you have identified the correct entries in these two dictionaries, consider questions such as these:

- Do the dictionaries cite the line in which you initially found your word? Do they cite other occurrences of the word in Chaucer's works? What senses do the dictionaries assign to the occurrences of the word in Chaucer's writings?
- Where did the word come from? (See the "Origin" and "Etymology" sections of the OED entry.)
- What happened to the word in the centuries between Chaucer's time and our own? Did the word develop new senses, lose the sense(s) in which it was used by Chaucer, or fall out of use entirely?

Here is a sample response, again using *his* and *corages*:

> The relevant *OED* entry for *his* is ["his, adj."](https://www-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/view/Entry/87241); the *MED* entry is ["his pron.(1)"](https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary/MED20878).
(The *OED* treats the pronoun and the possessive adjective in separate entries, whereas the *MED* groups them together in one entry.)
Chaucer's use of this word in line 1 of the General Prologue is quoted by the *OED* as an illustration of sense I.2 "Referring to a thing: its."
Clicking links within the *OED*'s etymological essay, I come to the *OED* entry "its, adj. and pron.", where I learn that *its*, possessive of *it*, did not exist yet when Chaucer wrote.
For Chaucer, the possessive of *it* is *his*; *its* first appears in the English language towards the end of the sixteenth century, not long before Shakespeare began writing.
In fact, the system of English pronouns has changed a lot since Chaucer's time and continues to change today.

> The relevant *OED* entry for *corages* is ["courage, n."](https://www-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/view/Entry/43146); the *MED* entry is ["corāǧe n."](https://quod-lib-umich-edu.flagship.luc.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary/MED9682).
Both dictionaries cite the line in which I found this word in Chaucer's poem, in both cases as an illustration of the sense "The heart as the seat of feeling, thought, etc.; spirit, mind, disposition, nature". (I quote the *OED*'s definition; the *MED*'s corresponding definition differs only slightly).
The *OED* marks this sense (the first recorded in either dictionary) with an obelisk aka dagger (†), [indicating that this meaning is obsolete](https://public-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/how-to-use-the-oed/key-to-symbols-and-other-conventions/), that is, [no longer in use in the English language](https://public-oed-com.flagship.luc.edu/how-to-use-the-oed/glossary/).
The *OED*'s etymological entry shows me that this word was assimilated into English from French and that the French word derives from Latin *cor* 'heart'.
The English word has lost the original concrete meaning of its ancestor, yet an associated abstract meaning remains in frequent use.

# Reflection

Step back and reflect on the work you have done in this assignment.
What larger issues do you perceive here, in terms of methodology, interpretation, and the relationship between literature and language?
What connections can you draw to previous readings or discussions in this course or in your other courses?

*Bon courage!*
