---
title: Annotated Bibliography and Class Presentation
tags:
- assignments
- research
- annotated bibliography
- presentation
- fall 2022
- ENGL 390
---
As a step toward the final essay for this class, each student will construct an annotated bibliography and deliver a class presentation supported by slides.

# Locating sources 
Begin with the editions used in this class.
Most of our editions contain introductions or bibliographies with recommendations for further reading.

Turn next to the [Library search page](http://libraries.luc.edu/),
the [MLA International Bibliography](http://libraries.luc.edu/databases_title?title=MLA+International+Bibliography+with+Full+Text+),
and the [Oxford Bibliographies](https://www-oxfordbibliographies-com.flagship.luc.edu/).
For links to some relevant Oxford Bibliographies, see the syllabus, section on "Annotated bibliography".

Library specialists are helpful in the research stage of assignments involving secondary sources. 
For details, visit [http://libraries.luc.edu/specialists](http://libraries.luc.edu/specialists).

Additional guidance on sources:

- Reviews of books are not suitable sources for this assignment.
- The Oxford Bibliographies are guides to the sources; they do not count as sources in their own right.
- Information available on the web varies widely in quality. 
Resources linked in Loyola's library catalogue and [database collection](http://libraries.luc.edu/databases) have been subjected to quality control, much like the scholarly books and journals housed in Cudahy Library. 
By contrast, most sites on the open web are uncontrolled.
For this assignment, you may select and annotate one source from the open web.
The rest must be physical or on-line resources supplied by Loyola's libraries.

# The annotated bibliography

Select **ten** sources relevant to your topic.
Read abstracts, tables of contents, and introductory and closing paragraphs.
On this basis select **five** sources for annotation.

Each entry on the annotated bibliography should have three parts, as follows:

1. **Bibliographic reference**. 
Identify your source in MLA or Chicago format.
For guidance follow the links in the syllabus ("Formal writing" > "General instructions").

2. **Summary**.
Summarize the content and argument of the source.

3. **Commentary**.
Explain why you selected this source.
What makes this source valuable to your project and how is it distinguished from other sources on your bibliography? 
What insights or important information does this source provide? 
What questions does it raise or answer?

The annotation for each source should be between 200 and 300 words.

At the end of the annotated bibliography, list an additional five sources that you inspected and decided not to select for annotation.


# The presentation

Create a slide presentation that introduces your topic to the class and summarizes your research. 
Each presentation should have the following components:

- An introduction to your topic and explanation of your approach and aims
- A report on your most interesting or surprising findings to date
- A text, image, or object for study and discussion in our class (supply some questions to guide our attention)
- A description of next steps, additional research you plan to undertake, or plans for turning your research into an argued essay
- A list of sources (put this on your final slide)

Aim to speak for about 10 minutes.
Each presentation should include one moment when you say, "And here's the passage (or image, or object) that I want to hear your opinion on."
Supply some questions and context to guide our attention.
Then be silent and let your audience observe, think, and respond.

Usually a presentation will be followed by class discussion; 
the best presentations invite thoughtful response from your peers.
