---
title: Instruction for translation and commentary (Chaucer)
tags:
- prompts
- assignments
- ENGL 390
- fall 2022
- fall 2021
- translation
- critical commentary
- Middle English Dictionary
- language history
- Chaucer, Geoffrey
---

Select a passage of about 12 lines from any of the works of Chaucer that we have read thus far.
The passage should make grammatical sense on its own.
(Do not start or stop in the middle of a clause, for example.)

# Supply bibliographic details for the edition you use
Do this if your text derives from a source other than the preferred edition listed on the syllabus.
Skip this step if you are reading from the preferred edition.

# Keyboard the passage
If you copy and paste from an on-line text of the *Canterbury Tales* supply bibliographic details for your source.
Check the text, letter-by-letter, against the one printed in our textbook; summarize the differences.

# Translate
Translate the passage into modern English prose.
Your translation should express the meaning of the Middle English poem as precisely as possible, but in fluent modern English.
There are translations on the web and in the library. My advice is that you not look at them for this assignment.
Here is an example of an acceptable translation of the opening of the Knight's Tale:

> Once, as old stories tell us, there was a duke named Theseus.
He was lord and governor of Athens and in his time he was such a great conqueror that there was none greater under the sun.

For comparison, here is the passage as printed in our textbook:

> | Whilom, as olde stories tellen us,
> | Ther was a duc that highte Theseus:
> | Of Atthenes he was lord and governour,
> | And in his time swich a conquerour
> | That gretter was there noon under the sonne.
<!-- checked against Lawton's Norton edition of CT -->

# Discuss
Write a critical commentary on your passage.
Critical commentary aims to show how the details of language and form contribute to the meaning of a selected passage of literary verse or prose.
Critical commentary should explain what is said in the passage under consideration:

- Who is speaking?
- What is the scene?
- How does the passage fit within larger arcs of narrative and thematic development?

Yet the focus should be on the *how* of saying:

- vocabulary and word choice
- metaphor, simile, and other figures of speech
- rhyme and other sound patterns, if significant
- sentence structure, style, and tone

Consider the following questions:

- What is distinctive about the vocabulary; what do individual words contribute to the meaning of the passage?
- If there is figurative language, how does it work and what does it contribute?
- Is the style colloquial, formal, or a mix of the two? What details create this impression?
- How do the qualities of the passage under consideration relate to the wider stylistic, thematic, or narrative development of the poem?

Write about those details that promise the best return on the attention you invest in them.

Be sure to read the editor's notes and marginal word-glosses on your passage.
The glossary at the back of our textbook may also be of use to you.
You should refer at least twice to a historical dictionary of the English language (either the *Middle English Dictionary* or the *Oxford English Dictionary*).
Your critical commentary should be approximately 500 words in length.

The due date and other instructions are stated in the syllabus.
