---
title: Prompts for the research essay in ENGL 390
comment: Instructions are in a separate zettel
tags:
- assignments
- prompts
- research
- Shakespeare, William
- Beaumont, Francis
- Fletcher, John
- fall 2022
- ENGL 390
---

Select one of the following topics or devise one of your own.

1. Extend and revise your midterm essay.
If you choose this option, submit your midterm essay (the paper copy with my comments) together with your final essay.
Write a cover letter (approximately 200 words) in which you identify the new work you have done.
The midterm essay should be revised comprehensively, with new introductory and concluding paragraphs and reworked body paragraphs.

1. Extend and revise one of your response papers written since midterm.
If you are interested in this option, contact me in advance to confirm that your topic lends itself to expansion into a research essay.

1. Compare the first folio edition of Chaucer's works, printed in 1532, with the first folio edition of Shakespeare's plays, printed in 1623.
Consult the 1532 Chaucer folio in the digital facsimile published by [Early English Books Online](https://www.proquest.com/eebo/docview/2248593320/C8ACCE0A95B14C17PQ/4)
and the 1623 Shakespeare folio in the digital facsimile published by [Internet Shakespeare Editions](https://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Library/facsimile/overview/book/F1.html).
Pay attention especially to the preliminary matter in each edition and to the design of pages and presentation of the text.
For help with the Chaucer folios, consult Cook's "The first first folios" and sources cited by her.
For the Shakespeare folio, consult chapter 2 of Kastan's *Shakespeare and the Book* and conduct your own independent reearch.
What similarities and differences do you observe between these publications and what significance do you attribute to your observations?

1. Compare the first folio edition of Shakespeare's plays, printed in 1623, with the first folio edition of the plays of Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, printed in 1647. 
Consult the Shakespeare folio in the digital facsimile published by [Internet Shakespeare Editions](https://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Library/facsimile/overview/book/F1.html)
and the physical copy of the Beaumont and Fletcher folio held in Loyola Archives and Special Collections (see [here](https://luc.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=alma996148443402506&context=L&vid=01LUC_INST:01LUC&search_scope=MyInst_and_CI&isFrbr=true&tab=Everything&lang=en)).
Pay attention especially to the preliminary matter in each edition and to the design of pages and presentation of the text.
What similarities and differences do you observe between these publications and what significance do you attribute to your observations?

1. Select one or two scenes from *Hamlet* and analyze differences between the three early texts of this play.
You might want to study especially *Hamlet* 3.4, 4.4, and 5.2.
Or follow the lead of Murphy's essay "What Happens in Hamlet?"
