---
title: Exams in UCLR
tags:
- exams
- passage_id
- UCLR 100
- ENGL 271
- poetry
- spring 2023
---

There is a midterm exam and final exam.
These assess your knowledge and understanding of course materials and skills in literary reading and interpretation.
The exams have two parts: passage identification and essay.
Sample essay questions will be provided in advance of the midterm and final exams.

# Instructions for passage identification
The passage identification section on the midterm essay has the following instructions:

> "For each passage, identify the passage (author, title, context), and write a short interpretative commentary on it, drawing for this purpose on the terms and concepts introduced in this course.
> Consider the following:
> 
> - What is the form of the poem from which the passage derives?
> - How do specific details of language-use contribute to the meaning of the passage?
>   Identify significant details of sound, rhythm and meter, word choice, syntax and word order, figurative language, and other relevant literary conventions.
> - What themes or issues are raised by the passage and its context?
>   If there is a pronoun in the passage, identify its antecedent.
> - How does the passage contribute to the meaning of the poem as a whole?
> 
> You are not expected to answer all questions for every passage.
> Use your judgment and write about details that repay the investment of attention you give to them."

There will be a choice of passages.
For instance, you might be asked to identify and write about 4 of 6 passages on the midterm exam.

# Rubric for passage identification
Each passage is worth 5 points.
Points are assigned according to the following rubric:

1. Correctly identifies the author, poem, and (where relevant) context. Major errors or misunderstandings in commentary.
2. Vague and diffuse; fails to make accurate use of course terms and concepts.
3. Adequate answer; uses course terms and concepts.
4. Strong answer with minor flaws in clarity or focus, or in use of course terms and concepts.
5. Clear, accurate, precise observations about the passage; observations are organized into a concise and persuasive argument about the construction and meaning of the poem.
