---
title: Prompts on Chaucer and book history
summary: Text and sources of the Wife of Bath's Prologue
tags:
- assignments
- prompts
- Chaucer, Geoffrey
- Canterbury Tales--Wife of Bath
- textual criticism
- source study
- annotations
- manuscripts--San Marino, Huntington Library, MS EL 26 C 9 (Ellesmere)
- fall 2022
- ENGL 390
mentions:
- Hanna, Ralph
- Donaldson, E. Talbot
- Lawton, David
---
Respond to one of the following prompts.
For general instructions see the syllabus.

1. Do you think that David Lawton prints the correct reading for line 117 of the Wife of Bath's Prologue?
Discuss Lawton's note to this line and the argument of the essay by E. Talbot Donaldson.


1. View the Wife of Bath's Prologue in [the Ellesmere manuscript](https://hdl.huntington.org/digital/collection/p15150coll7/id/2491/rec/1).
Notice the marginal glosses, written in Latin.
These are translated into English in [the notes to *The Riverside Chaucer*](https://sakai.luc.edu/x/Phn8tV).
Most of the glosses are quotations from Chaucer's sources, including the Bible and the misogynist literature depicted within the fiction as Jankyn's "book of wikked wyves" (described at lines 669--81).
Select one gloss and discuss its relation to the English text of Alisoun's Prologue.
Should modern editions suppress the marginal glosses or make them part of the reading experience? If so, how?
<!--
The glosses are transcribed by J.M. Manley and Edith Rickert in [*The Text of the Canterbury Tales*](https://sakai.luc.edu/x/5h8z3M)
More guidance on this prompt:
The marginal glosses to which I direct your attention are excerpts from Chaucer's biblical and theological sources --- the patriarchal and misogynist discourses that Alisoun of Bath subverts and appropriates to her own ends in the Prologue. So, here we have the voice of patriarchy speaking back to Alisoun, from the margins (and in Latin). How should a feminist reading describe what is going on in this text? Should modern editions suppress the marginal glosses or make them part of the reading experience? If so, how?
-->


1. Read Theofrastus's *Golden Book of Marriage*, pp. 357--59 in A. J. Rigg's [translation of Chaucer's sources](https://sakai.luc.edu/x/cd1LGt).
Notice that Rigg records, in footnotes, corresponding passages of the Wife of Bath's Prologue.
Select one passage from Theofrastus's text and discuss Chaucer's (or Alisoun's?) use of it.
Recall that Alisoun would have known Theofrastus's text, as one of the components of Jankyn's "book of wikked wyves."
Do you think it is significant that Chaucer has given Alisoun knowledge of the texts he has used to create her character? Why?


1. Ralph Hanna, in a discussion of lines 15--23 of The Wife of Bath's Prologue, states that Alisoun "reasserts gender-marking in a way that reveals precisely the closed male ideological system" of the source-text, Jerome's *Against Jovinian* (p. 254).
What does Hanna mean by a "closed male ideological system"?
How does Alisoun (and Chaucer?) challenge that system and open it to interpretation?
