---
title: Prompts on Chaucer and book history
summary: Second week with manuscripts
tags:
- assignments
- prompts
- book history
- transcription
- description
- Chaucer, Geoffrey
- Canterbury Tales--Wife of Bath
- Loyola University Chicago, Archives and Special Collections
- manuscripts--San Marino, Huntington Library, MS EL 26 C 9 (Ellesmere)
- manuscripts--Aberystwyth, National Library of Wales, MS Hengwrt 154 (Peniarth 392D)
- fall 2022
- ENGL 390
mentions:
- Boffey, Julia
- Edwards, A.S.G.
- Kerby-Fulton, Kathryn
---
Respond to one of the following prompts.
For general instructions see the syllabus.

1. Compare the transcription of the Cook's Tale on p. 16 of *Opening up Middle English Manuscripts* with the manuscript image on p. 17.
Using this transcription as a model, transcribe the first thirteen lines of the Wife of Bath's Prologue from [the Ellesmere manuscript](https://hdl.huntington.org/digital/collection/p15150coll7/id/2491/rec/1).
Briefly describe some of your transcription decisions, including doubts or questions that are provoked by this assignment.
Then compare your transcription of these lines with the text printed in our edition.
What differences do you notice?
Attempt to organize, classify, and explain some of the differences.

1. Julia Boffey and A.S.G. Edwards state their intention to demonstrate "some of the essential differences between medieval and modern modes of literary production" (p. 49). Discuss one or two differences that seem to you especially important.
Draw connections, where appropriate, to the essay by Ivy and to readings from the Harvard METRO site and *Opening up Middle English Manuscripts*.

1. Schedule a research visit to Loyola's Archives and Special Collections and request to view one of the manuscripts we viewed during our visit on 27 September.
Leaf through the manuscript, carefully.
Then select one page and describe it in as much detail as you can: report the size and shape of the leaf; the material support (is it paper or parchment? what color and texture?); the layout of text, blank space, and any images (how may columns of text and how many lines? what visual relationships are there between text, image, and blank space?); the color of the ink; and the appearance of the writing (without trying to transcribe the text, describe what it looks like up close and from a few feet back).
Refer, where appropriate, to the essay by Ivy and to readings from the Harvard METRO site and *Opening up Middle English Manuscripts*.
Finally, explain briefly why you selected this particular page.
Include an image of the page at the end of your response paper.
