---
title: Prompts on Hamlet and book history (week 1)
tags:
- assignments
- prompts
- 16th century
- 17th century
- book history
- printed books
- Shakespeare, William
- early modern English
- pronunciation
- Hamlet
- annotations
- translation
- editions
- ENGL 390
- fall 2022
mentions:
- Kastan, David Scott
---
Respond to one of the following prompts.
For general instructions see the syllabus.

1. Read Ann Thompson and Neil Taylor's statements of editorial method (Introduction, pp. 8--12, 88--96).
Compare the Arden editors' handling of Shakespeare's *Hamlet* with David Lawton's approach to editing Chaucer's *Canterbury Tales*.
(See pp. vii--viii and 42--45 in the Norton *Canterbury Tales*.)

1. Select two annotations to Act 1 of *Hamlet* (the second quarto text) in the edition of Thompson and Taylor --- one annotation that you find helpful and one that you find less than helpful.
For the helpful annotation, explain what it adds to your reading experience.
For the unhelpful annotation, identify the reasons for your dissatisfaction.
If you think the annotation is insufficient, say what is missing.
If you think the annotation is superfluous and should have been omitted, speculate on the editors' motivations for writing and printing it.

1. Select one line from Act 1 of *Hamlet* (the second quarto text).
Using the [The Oxford Dictionary of Original Shakespearean Pronunciation](https://www-oxfordreference-com.flagship.luc.edu/view/10.1093/acref/9780199668427.001.0001/acref-9780199668427) construct an IPA transcription of the line as it might have been spoken in early seventeenth-century English.
What differences do you observe between the reconstructed Shakespearean pronunciation and your own everyday pronunciation of English?
What does this exercise contribute to your experience of the play?
(For more on this topic, listen to the podcast ["Pronouncing English as Shakespeare Did"](https://www.folger.edu/shakespeare-unlimited/original-pronunciation).)

1. Read chapter 1 of David Scott Kastan's *Shakespeare and the Book*, taking note of themes or topics that you have encountered previously in Sarah Werner's *Studying Early Printed Books* or Adrian Johns's "The Coming of Print to Europe."
Select one shared topic and compare Kastan's presentation with either Werner or Johns.
What do you learn about this topic from Kastan and Werner (or Kastan and Johns) and what do you learn about Shakespeare from Kastan?
What does this study of printing practices contribute to your understanding and experience of Shakespeare's plays?

1. Find a translation of *Hamlet* into a language other than English that you can read.
Supply bibliographic details for the translation.
Select a passage of 2--4 lines from Act 1 of *Hamlet*, then keyboard the lines from the translation and compare the translation with the English text.
Is there, in general, a word-for-word correspondence between the English text and the translation?
At what points does a word-for-word correspondence give way to looser correspondences, and what do these divergences allow you to infer about idiom, figurative language, or grammatical structure?
What difficulties do you think the translator might have encountered in these lines?
What translation choices do you find especially effective, or ineffective, and why?
If this exercise draws your attention to specific words in the English text (translation does that), discuss those words and the way they are rendered in the translation.
Write for someone who might not be able to read the language of the translation.
