---
title: Course description for intro Old English
tags:
- course description
- syllabus
- ENGL 321
- ENGL 441
- Old English
dates:
  era: ''
  year: '2024'
---
In this course we learn to read English from more than 1000 years ago.
English has changed so much since this early period that speakers of Present Day English (PDE) must approach Old English as if it were foreign, by learning grammar and vocabulary and even some new letters.
Yet the languages remain close enough that speakers of PDE learn Old English quickly.
Learning to read Old English gives a fresh perspective on PDE (for instance, why *ran* and *feet*, not *runned* and *foots*?) and unique access to a rich body of literature: about 30,000 lines of English poetry survive from the period between 600 and 1200 and more than ten times as much prose (including sermons, historical narratives and chronicles, Bible translations, philosophy, and medical writings).

In the first half of this course we learn the basic grammar of Old English and some core vocabulary and learn to translate short texts.
In the second half, we sample the diversity of literature in Old English: readings become longer and more challenging and class discussion becomes more interpretative.
Secondary readings introduce us to the history and culture of early medieval England and contextualize our study of language.
In the last two weeks we read *Beowulf* in Seamus Heaney's translation, with dips into the original Old English.
Assessment is by quizzes, midterm and final exams, a research assignment, and a class presentation.
