---
title: Course description and objectives
summary: A section of UCLR 100 on voice and 'speaking out'
tags:
- syllabus
- course description
- UCLR 100
- voice
- spring 2023
- objectives
---

What power does a voice have?
In this course we study defiant, bold, despondent, and expressive voices that speak out from the pages of literary verse, prose, and drama.
Readings include
Gloria Anzaldúa's "How to Tame a Wild Tongue,"
Sophocles's *Antigone*,
Shakespeare's *The Tempest*,
Plato's *Apology of Socrates*,
Margery Kempe's *Book*,
The Wife of Bath's Prologue and Tale (from Geoffrey Chaucer's *Canterbury Tales*),
and short poems by
Anna Letitia Barbauld,
Paul Laurence Dunbar,
Edna St. Vincent Millay,
Esther Phillips,
Alexander Pope,
Dudley Randall,
and
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Through these readings we gain experience of forms of English different from the modern standard and we develop heightened and sharpened powers of attention to literary creations and the "many kinds of voices" carried within them.
Assessment is by quizzes, a class presentation, and midterm and final exams.
<!--
Topics include discursive address, footing, character, sound-pattern, form, and meaning.
-->

This course satisfies the first tier of Loyola University's core Knowledge Area requirement in "[Literary Knowledge](https://www.luc.edu/core/litknowcoursesub-first.shtml)."
In this Knowledge Area students explore the forms that shape literary expressions; the creative processes that produce them; the concepts and terms that facilitate their interpretation; and the cultural, social, linguistic, and historical contexts in which they are produced.
After completing two courses in this Area, students will be able to:

- identify, explain, and analyze carefully key components of various literary productions that deepen understanding of human experiences and creative processes.
- use critical and technical vocabulary to describe, analyze, and formulate an argument about literary productions.
- assess how various forms of literary expression shape the experience and response of the audience.
- examine multiple interpretive possibilities of any literary work.
- articulate the relationships of works of literature to the cultures and histories in which they were created and used.
