---
title: Schedule for Old English (undergraduate)
tags:
- syllabus
- schedule
- spring 2024
- ENGL 321
- Old English
---
[course reserve]: https://luc.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/search?query=any,contains,cornelius%20321&tab=CourseReserves&search_scope=CourseReserves&vid=01LUC_INST:01LUC
[Sakai]: https://sakai.luc.edu/portal/directtool/0d4ee0b0-42d1-4868-98e2-8aa0cd77b220/

Dates on the schedule below are combined class meetings (undergraduate and graduate).
Graduate students have some additional meetings.
Readings for those are listed at the beginning of each week.
Dates and times for the graduate-only meetings will be set in due course.

# Old English grammar
## Week 1 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Jan 16 {.unnumbered}
Introductions (no reading assignment)

### Jan 18 {.unnumbered}
- [@FulkIntroductoryGrammarOld2014], Introduction and Chap. I
- Introductions to the [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://enunciate.arts.ubc.ca/linguistics/world-sounds/)
  and [modern English phonology](https://enunciate.arts.ubc.ca/linguistics/introductory-videos/)
- [@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 1: Brooks, "The social and political background" ([course reserve])

## Week 2 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 12: Godden, "Biblical literature: the Old Testament" ([course reserve])

### Jan 23 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. II and III

### Jan 25 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. IV and V

## Week 3 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@FulkHistoryOldEnglish2013], Chap. 1: "The chronology and varieties of Old English literature" ([course reserve])

### Jan 30 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. VI and VII

### Feb 01 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. VIII and IX

## Week 4 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 16: Lendinara, "The world of Anglo-Saxon learning" ([course reserve])

### Feb 06 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. X and XI

### Feb 08 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XII and XIII

## Week 5 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 4: Anlezark, "The Anglo-Saxon world view" ([course reserve])

### Feb 13 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XIV and XV

### Feb 15 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XVI and XVII

## Week 6 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 2: Gneuss, "The Old English language" ([course reserve])

### Feb 20 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XVIII and XIX

### Feb 22 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XX and XXI

## Week 7 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Feb 27 {.unnumbered}
Grammar review

### Feb 29 {.unnumbered}
Midterm exam

## Week 8 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
Spring Break: class does not meet

# An anthology
## Week 9 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 15: Gretsch, "Literacy and uses of the vernacular" ([course reserve])
<!--
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 14: Lapidge, "The saintly life in Anglo-Saxon England" ([course reserve])
-->

### Mar 12 {.unnumbered}
The Story of Cædmon (Fulk, Text 1.B), lines 74--152

### Mar 14 {.unnumbered}
King Alfred's Preface to the *Pastoral Care* (Fulk, Text 2)

## Week 10 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 9: Clayton, "Preaching and teaching" ([course reserve])

### Mar 19 {.unnumbered}
Selections from the Parker Chronicle (Fulk, Text 3)

### Mar 21 {.unnumbered}
Ælfric on the Three Estates (Fulk, Test, 4)

## Week 11 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 3: Scragg, "The nature of Old English verse" ([course reserve])

### Mar 26 {.unnumbered}
Riddles from the Exeter Book (Fulk, Text 14).
Read 26, 35, 45, 46, and 47

### Mar 28 {.unnumbered}
Easter Holiday: class does not meet

## Week 12 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 13: Marsden, "Biblical literature: the New Testament" ([course reserve])

### Apr 02 {.unnumbered}
*Dream of the Rood* (Fulk, Text 15), lines 1--70

### Apr 04 {.unnumbered}
*Dream of the Rood*, lines 71--end

## Week 13 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 10: Fell, "Perceptions of transience" ([course reserve])

### Apr 09 {.unnumbered}
*The Wanderer* (Fulk, Text 16), lines 1--63

### Apr 11 {.unnumbered}
*The Wanderer*, lines 64--end

# *Beowulf*
## Week 14 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 8: Orchard, "*Beowulf*" ([course reserve])

### Apr 16 {.unnumbered}
- *Beowulf* (trans. Heaney), lines 1--2199 (in [@DonoghueBeowulfVerseTranslation2002])
- Heaney, "Translator's Introduction" (in [@DonoghueBeowulfVerseTranslation2002])

### Apr 18 {.unnumbered}
*Beowulf* (trans. Heaney), lines 2200--end
<!--
- Robinson, "The Tomb of *Beowulf*"
-->

## Week 15 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
[@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 6: O'Keeffe, "Values and ethics in heroic literature" ([course reserve])

### Apr 23 {.unnumbered}
Selections from *Beowulf* in original lang. ([Sakai])

### Apr 25 {.unnumbered}
Class does not meet

## Week 16 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
**final exam** Thursday, 4:15PM
