---
title: Schedule for Old English (undergraduate)
tags:
- syllabus
- schedule
- spring 2024
- ENGL 321
- Old English
---

[course reserve]: https://luc.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/discovery/search?query=any,contains,cornelius%20321&tab=CourseReserves&search_scope=CourseReserves&vid=01LUC_INST:01LUC
[Sakai]: https://sakai.luc.edu/portal/directtool/0d4ee0b0-42d1-4868-98e2-8aa0cd77b220/

# Old English grammar
## Week 1 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Jan 16 {.unnumbered}
Introductions (no reading assignment)

### Jan 18 {.unnumbered}
- [@FulkIntroductoryGrammarOld2014], Introduction and Chap. I
- Introductions to the [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://enunciate.arts.ubc.ca/linguistics/world-sounds/)
  and [modern English phonology](https://enunciate.arts.ubc.ca/linguistics/introductory-videos/)
- [@GoddenCambridgeCompanionOld2013], Chap. 1: Brooks, "The Social and Political Background" ([course reserve])

## Week 2 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Jan 23 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. II and III

### Jan 25 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. IV and V

## Week 3 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Jan 30 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. VI and VII

### Feb 01 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. VIII and IX

## Week 4 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Feb 06 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. X and XI

### Feb 08 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XII and XIII

## Week 5 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Feb 13 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XIV and XV

### Feb 15 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XVI and XVII

## Week 6 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Feb 20 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XVIII and XIX

### Feb 22 {.unnumbered}
Fulk, Chap. XX and XXI

## Week 7 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Feb 27 {.unnumbered}
Grammar review

### Feb 29 {.unnumbered}
Midterm exam

## Week 8 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
Spring Break: class does not meet

# An anthology
## Week 9 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Mar 12 {.unnumbered}
The Story of Cædmon (Fulk, Text 1.B), lines 74--152

### Mar 14 {.unnumbered}
King Alfred's Preface to the *Pastoral Care* (Fulk, Text 2)

## Week 10 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Mar 19 {.unnumbered}
Selections from the Parker Chronicle (Fulk, Text 3)

### Mar 21 {.unnumbered}
Ælfric on the Three Estates (Fulk, Test, 4)

## Week 11 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Mar 26 {.unnumbered}
Riddles from the Exeter Book (Fulk, Text 14).
Read 26, 35, 45, 46, and 47

### Mar 28 {.unnumbered}
Easter Holiday: class does not meet

## Week 12 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Apr 02 {.unnumbered}
*Dream of the Rood* (Fulk, Text 15), lines 1--70

### Apr 04 {.unnumbered}
*Dream of the Rood*, lines 71--end

## Week 13 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Apr 09 {.unnumbered}
*The Wanderer* (Fulk, Text 16), lines 1--63

### Apr 11 {.unnumbered}
*The Wanderer*, lines 64--end

# *Beowulf*
## Week 14 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Apr 16 {.unnumbered}
- *Beowulf* (trans. Heaney), lines 1--2199 (in [@DonoghueBeowulfVerseTranslation2002])
- Heaney, "Translator's Introduction" (in [@DonoghueBeowulfVerseTranslation2002])

### Apr 18 {.unnumbered}
*Beowulf* (trans. Heaney), lines 2200--end
<!--
- Robinson, "The Tomb of *Beowulf*"
-->

## Week 15 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
### Apr 23 {.unnumbered}
Selections from *Beowulf* in original lang. ([Sakai])

### Apr 25 {.unnumbered}
Class does not meet

## Week 16 {.unlisted .unnumbered}
**final exam** Thursday, 4:15PM
